Medical biology 
1. Structure and functions of proteins. Primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structures. Allostery. 
Proteins are the workhorses of the cell. Virtually everything that goes on inside of cells happens as a result of the actions of proteins. Among other things, protein enzymes catalyze the vast majority of cellular reactions, mediate signaling, give structure both to cells and to multicellular organisms, and exert control over the expression of genes. Life, as we know it, would not exist if there were no proteins. The versatility of proteins arises because of their varied structures.
Proteins are made by linking together amino acids, with each protein having a characteristic and unique amino acid sequence. 
Levels of Structure
The significance of the unique sequence, or order, of amino acids, known as the protein’s primary structure, is that it dictates the 3-D conformation the folded protein will have. This conformation, in turn, will determine the function of the protein. 
We use the term polypeptide to refer to a single polymer of amino acids. It may or may not have folded into its final, functional form. The term protein is sometimes used interchangeably with polypeptide, as in “protein synthesis”. It is generally used, however, to refer to a folded, functional molecule that may have one or more subunits (made up of individual polypeptides). Thus, when we use the term protein, we are usually referring to a functional, folded polypeptide or peptides. Structure is essential for function. If you alter the structure, you alter the function - usually, but not always, this means you lose all function. For many proteins, it is not difficult to alter the structure.
Proteins are flexible, not rigidly fixed in structure. As we shall see, it is the flexibility of proteins that allows them to be amazing catalysts and allows them to adapt to, respond to, and pass on signals upon binding of other molecules or proteins. However, proteins are not infinitely flexible. There are constraints on the conformations that proteins can adopt and these constraints govern the conformations that proteins display.
Even very tiny, subtle changes in protein structure can give rise to big changes in the behavior of proteins. Hemoglobin, for example, undergoes an incredibly small structural change upon binding of one oxygen molecule, and that simple change causes the remainder of the protein to gain a considerably greater affinity for oxygen that the protein didn’t have before the structural change.
Protein Synthesis
Synthesis of proteins occurs in the ribosomes and proceeds by joining the carboxyl terminus of the first amino acid to the amino terminus of the next one (Figure 2.19). The end of the protein that has the free α-amino group is referred to as the amino terminus or N-terminus. The other end is called the carboxyl terminus or C-terminus , since it contains the only free α-carboxyl group. All of the other α-amino groups and α-carboxyl groups are tied up in forming peptide Figure 2.19 Linking of amino acids through peptide bond formation bonds that join adjacent amino acids together. Proteins are synthesized starting with the amino terminus and ending at the carboxyl terminus.

Primary Structure
Primary structure is the ultimate determinant of the overall conformation of a protein. The primary structure of any protein arrived at its current state as a result of mutation and selection over evolutionary time. Primary structure of proteins is mandated by the sequence of DNA coding for it in the genome. Regions of DNA specifying proteins are known as coding regions (or genes).
The base sequences of these regions directly specify the sequence of amino acids in proteins, with a one-to-one correspondence between the codons (groups of three consecutive bases) in the DNA and the amino acids in the encoded protein. The sequence of codons in DNA, copied into messenger RNA, specifies a sequence of amino acids in a protein. 
  

The order in which the amino acids are joined together in protein synthesis starts defining a set of interactions between amino acids even as the synthesis is occurring. That is, a polypeptide can fold even as it is being made. The order of the R-group structures and resulting interactions are very important because early interactions affect later interactions. This is because interactions start establishing structures - secondary and tertiary. If a helical structure (secondary structure), for example, starts to form, the possibilities for interaction of a particular amino acid Rgroup may be different than if the helix had not formed. R-group interactions can also cause bends in a polypeptide sequence (tertiary structure) and these bends can create (in some cases) opportunities for interactions that wouldn’t have been possible without the bend or prevent (in other cases) similar interaction possibilities.
Secondary Structure
As protein synthesis progresses, interactions between amino acids close to each other begin to occur, giving rise to local patterns called secondary structure. These secondary structures include the well known α- helix and β-strands. Both were predicted by Linus Pauling, Robert Corey, and Herman Branson in 1951. Each structure has unique features.
α-helix
  



























The α-helix has a coiled structure, with 3.6 amino acids per turn of the helix (5 helical turns = 18 amino acids). Helices are predominantly right handed - only in rare cases, such as in sequences with many glycines can left handed α- helices form. In the α-helix, hydrogen bonds form between C=O groups and N-H groups in the polypeptide backbone that are four amino acids distant. These hydrogen bonds are the primary forces stabilizing the α-helix.
  

We use the terms rise, repeat, and pitch to describe the parameters of any helix. The repeat is the number of residues in a helix before it begins to repeat itself. For an α-helix, the repeat is 3.6 amino acids per turn of the helix. The rise is the distance the helix elevates with addition of each residue. For an α-helix, this is 0.15 nm per amino acid. The pitch is the distance between complete turns of the helix. For an α-helix, this is 0.54 nm. The stability of an α-helix is enhanced by the presence of the amino acid aspartate.  


β strand/sheet
A helix is, of course, a three-dimensional object. A flattened form of helix in two dimensions is a common description for a β- strand. Rather than coils, β-strands have bends and these are sometimes referred to as pleats, like the pleats in a curtain. β-strands can be organized to form elaborately organized structures, such as sheets, barrels, and other arrangements.
Higher order β-strand structures are sometimes called supersecondary structures), since they involve interactions between amino acids not close in primary sequence. These structures, too, are stabilized by hydrogen bonds between carbonyl oxygen atoms and hydrogens of amine groups in the polypeptide backbone. In a higher order structure, strands can be arranged parallel (amino to carboxyl orientations the same) or anti-parallel (amino to carboxyl orientations opposite of each other.
Turns
  

Turns (sometimes called reverse turns) are a type of secondary structure that, as the name suggests, causes a turn in the structure of a polypeptide chain. Turns give rise to tertiary structure ultimately, causing interruptions in the secondary structures (α- helices and β-strands) and often serve as connecting regions between two regions of secondary structure in a protein. Proline and glycine play common roles in turns, providing less flexibility (starting the turn) and greater flexibility (facilitating the turn), respectively.
There are at least five types of turns, with numerous variations of each giving rise to many different turns. The five types of turns are
• δ-turns - end amino acids are separated by one peptide bond
• γ-turns - separation by two peptide bonds
•β-turns - separation by three peptide bonds
•α-turns - separation by four peptide bonds
•π-turns - separation by five bonds
Of these, the β-turns are the most common form and the δ-turns are theoretical, but unlikely, due to steric limitations.
Tertiary structure
  

Proteins are distinguished from each other by the sequence of amino acids comprising them. The sequence of amino acids of a protein determines protein shape, since the chemical properties of each amino acid are forces that give rise to intermolecular interactions to begin to create secondary structures, such as α-helices and β-strands. The sequence also defines turns and random coils that play important roles in the process of protein folding.
Since shape is essential for protein function, the sequence of amino acids gives rise to all of the properties a protein has. As protein synthesis proceeds, individual components of secondary structure start to interact with each other, giving rise to folds that bring amino acids close together that are not near each other in primary structure. At the tertiary level of structure, interactions among the R-groups of the amino acids in the protein, as well as between the polypeptide backbone and amino acid side groups play a role in folding.
Globular proteins
  

Folding gives rise to distinct 3-D shapes in proteins that are non-fibrous. These proteins are called globular. A globular protein is stabilized by the same forces that drive its formation. These include ionic interactions, hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic forces, ionic bonds, disulfide bonds and metallic bonds. Treatments such as heat, pH changes, detergents, urea and mercaptoethanol overpower the stabilizing forces and cause a protein to unfold, losing its structure and (usually) its function. The ability of heat and detergents to denature proteins is why we cook our food and wash our hands before eating - such treatments denature the proteins in the microorganisms on our hands. Organisms that live in environments of high temperature (over 50°C) have proteins with changes in stabilizing forces - additional hydrogen bonds, additional salt bridges (ionic interactions), and compactness may all play roles in keeping these proteins from unfolding.
Protein stabilizing forces
Before considering the folding process, let us consider some of the forces that help to stabilize proteins.
Hydrogen bonds
  

Hydrogen bonds arise as a result of partially charged hydrogens found in covalent bonds. This occurs when the atom the hydrogen is bonded to has a greater electronegativity than hydrogen itself does, resulting in hydrogen having a partial positive charge because it is not able to hold electrons close to itself .
Hydrogen partially charged in this way is attracted to atoms, such as oxygen and nitrogen that have partial negative charges, due to having greater electronegativities and thus holding electrons closer to themselves. The partially positively charged hydrogens are called donors, whereas the partially negative atoms they are attracted to are called acceptors.
  











Individual hydrogen bonds are much weaker than a covalent bond, but collectively, they can exert strong forces. Consider liquid water, which contains enormous numbers of hydrogen bonds. These forces help water to remain liquid at room temperature. Other molecules lacking hydrogen bonds of equal or greater molecular weight than water, such as methane or carbon dioxide, are gases at the same temperature. Thus, the intermolecular interactions between water molecules help to “hold” water together and remain a liquid. Notably, only by raising the temperature of water to boiling are the forces of hydrogen bonding overcome, allowing water to become fully gaseous.
Hydrogen bonds are important forces in biopolymers that include DNA, proteins, and cellulose. All of these polymers lose their native structures upon boiling. Hydrogen bonds between amino acids that are close to each other in primary structure can give rise to regular repeating structures, such as helices or pleats, in proteins (secondary structure).
Ionic interactions
Ionic interactions are important forces stabilizing protein structure that arise from ionization of R-groups in the amino acids comprising a protein. These include the carboxyl amino acids, the amine amino acids as well as the sulfhydryl of cysteine and sometimes the hydroxyl of tyrosine.
Hydrophobic forces
Hydrophobic forces stabilize protein structure as a result of interactions that favor the exclusion of water. Non-polar amino acids (commonly found in the interior of proteins) favor associating with each other and this has the effect of excluding water. The excluded water has a higher entropy than water interacting with the hydrophobic side chains. This is because water aligns itself very regularly and in a distinct pattern when interacting with hydrophobic molecules.
When water is prevented from having these kinds of interactions, it is much more disordered that it would be if it could associate with the hydrophobic regions. It is partly for this reason that hydrophobic amino acids are found in protein interiors - so they can exclude water and increase entropy.
Disulfide bonds
  

Disulfide bonds, which are made when two sulfhydryl side-chains of cysteine are brought into close proximity, covalently join together different protein regions and can give great strength to the overall structure. 
van der Waals forces
van der Waals forces is a term used to describe various weak interactions, including those caused by attraction between a polar molecule and a transient dipole, or between two temporary dipoles. van der Waals forces are dynamic because of the fluctuating nature of the attraction, and are generally weak in comparison to covalent bonds, but can, over very short distances, be significant.


Post-translational modifications
Post-translational modifications can result in formation of covalent bonds stabilizing proteins as well. Hydroxylation of lysine and proline in strands of collagen can result in cross-linking of these groups and the resulting covalent bonds help to strengthen and stabilize the collagen.


Quaternary structure
A fourth level of protein structure is that of quaternary structure. It refers to structures that arise as a result of interactions between multiple polypeptides. The units can be identical multiple copies or can be different polypeptide chains. Adult hemoglobin is a good example of a protein with quaternary structure, being composed of two identical chains called α and two identical chains called β.
Though the α-chains are very similar to the β- chains, they are not identical. Both of the α- and the β-chains are also related to the single polypeptide chain in the related protein called myoglobin. Both myoglobin and hemoglobin have similarity in binding oxygen, but their behavior towards the molecule differ significantly. Notably, hemoglobin’s multiple subunits (with quaternary structure) compared to myoglobin’s single subunit (with no quaternary structure) give rise to these differences.


Allosteric Regulation
Allosteric regulation refers to the process for modulating the activity of a protein by the binding of a ligand, called an effector, to a site topographically distinct from the site of the protein, called the active site, in which the activity characterizing the protein is carried out, whether catalytic (in the case of enzymes) or binding (in the case of receptors) in nature. The word allosteric, Greek for other site, was coined to emphasize this distinctness. The modulation of protein activity is accomplished by the reversible alteration of the protein conformation that accompanies effector binding. Effectors that increase activity are called activators, while those that decrease activity are called inhibitors.
Allostery is the process by which biological macromolecules (mostly proteins) transmit the effect of binding at one site to another, often distal, functional site, allowing for regulation of activity.




Summarised:
1. Primary structure (sequence) Arrangement of amino acids in a polypeptide chain. Number of amino acid. Type of amino acid.
2. Secondary structure: The orientation of the atoms of the peptide chain in space. The secondary structure is stabilized by hydrogen bonds. There are two type of structure: alfa-helix and Beta-sheet.
3. Tertiary structure The orientation of all the atoms of the peptide chain in space.
4. Quaternary structure Orientation in space of all subunits of a protein complex.


A point mutation or substitution is a genetic mutation where a single nucleotide base is changed, inserted or deleted from a sequence of DNA or RNA.
Types of point mutations: 
* Substitution- A substitution mutation occurs when one base pair is substituted for another. For example, this would occur when one nucleotide containing cytosine is accidentally substituted for one containing guanine. There are three types of substitution mutations:    
• Nonsense 
• Missense 
• Silent 
* Nonsense mutation occurs when one nucleotide is substituted and this leads to the formation of a stop codon instead of a codon that codes for an amino acid. A stop codon a certain sequence of bases (TAG, TAA, or TGA in DNA, and UAG, UAA, or UGA in RNA) that stops the production of the amino acid chain. It is always found at the end of the mRNA sequence when a protein is being produced, but if a substitution causes it to appear in another place, it will prematurely terminate the amino acid sequence and prevent the correct protein from being produced. 
* Missense mutation occurs when one nucleotide is substituted and a different codon is formed: but this time, the codon that forms is not a stop codon. Instead, the codon produces a different amino acid in the sequence of amino acids. For example, if a missense substitution changes a codon from AAG to AGG, the amino acid arginine will be produced instead of lysine. A missense mutation is considered conservative if the amino acid formed via the mutation has similar properties to the one that was supposed to be formed instead. It is called non-conservative if the amino acid has different properties that structure and function of a protein.




2. Structure and functions of polysaccharides, chemically modified carbohydrates, glycoproteins and proteoglycans. 
In nature, most carbohydrates exist as polymers, rather than monomers. Polysaccharides are one of the most abundant carbohydrates. They're polymers consisting of ten or more simple sugar units. They're composed of thousands or hundreds of thousands of simple sugars bonded together, and can have molecular masses as high as 100 million atomic mass units. The function of a polysaccharide is determined by the monomers it contains, and by the way they're linked together. When many monosaccharides combine in condensation reactions, the product is a polysaccharide. The other products are molecules of water that are removed in order to join one monosaccharide molecule to the next.
Cellulose is a polysaccharide found in all plants. Cellulose is the most abundant natural polymer in the world. Cellulose is made of beta-glucose monomers, where the O-H group on carbon one points up. The beta-glucose monomers in cellulose produce a nearly-linear molecule. The O-H groups on the glucose monomers can form hydrogen bonds to O-H groups on another cellulose molecule. These bonds enable cellulose strands to form fibers that give plants and trees a rigid structure.
Other polysaccharides can also be used for structural support. Invertebrate animals like snails, shellfish, and insects have exoskeletons made of a substance called chitin. The monomers in a chitin molecule are a beta-glucose derivative with a different functional group at carbon 2. The beta linkages between monomers mean that chitin is structurally similar to cellulose. Both molecules consist of linear strands that can form hydrogen bonds to other strands.
Starch is another plant polysaccharide. Plants produce starch to store energy, but it's also an important source of energy for organisms that eat those plants. Starch is made of alpha-glucose monomers, where the OH group on carbon one points down.
Even though starch and cellulose are made from nearly-identical monomers, each has a unique structure that determines its properties and function. The alpha-glucose monomers in starch produce a helical, compact structure that's used for energy storage in plants. 
A similar molecule called glycogen is found in animal cells that need to store a lot of energy, like muscle cells. Glycogen is a polymer of alpha-D-glucose, with frequent branches off of carbon six. Since glycogen is even more dense than starch, it's a more efficient form of energy storage for organisms that move around.
The important thing to remember about polysaccharides is the relationship between their structure and function. Polysaccharides generally perform one of two functions: energy storage or structural support. Starch and glycogen are highly compact polymers that are used for energy storage. Cellulose and chitin are linear polymers that are used for structural support in plants and animals, respectively.






Carbohydrates 
Carbohydrates are the third major component of plasma membranes. In general, they are found on the outside surface of cells and are bound either to proteins (forming glycoproteins) or to lipids (forming glycolipids). These carbohydrate chains may consist of 2-60 monosaccharide units and can be either straight or branched. Along with membrane proteins, these carbohydrates form distinctive cellular markers, sort of like molecular ID badges, that allow cells to recognize each other. These markers are very important in the immune system, allowing immune cells to differentiate between body cells, which they shouldn’t attack, and foreign cells or tissues, which they should.


Chemically modified carbohydrates are carbohydrates that have been modified with some functional group. Many carbohydrate modifications such as some epimerization, O-acetylation, O-sulfation, O-methylation, N-deacetylation, and N-sulfation, take place after the formation of oligosaccharide or polysaccharide backbones. These modifications can be categorized as carbohydrate post-glycosylational modifications.
In vertebrates, the sulfation of carbohydrates on proteoglycans, glycoproteins, and glycolipids, as well as varied modification of sialic acid including sulfation, methylation, some acetylation, and lactylation are believed to take place after the formation of the glycosidic bond. These processes can therefore, be described as carbohydrate post-glycosylational modifications (PGMs), analogous with the term of commonly known protein post-translational modifications (PTMs).


A proteoglycan is a glycoconjugate, a biomolecule with a core protein covalently attached to glycosaminoglycan (GAG) chains. Glycosaminoglycans or mucopolysaccharides are long, unbranched polysaccharides comprising of a repeating disaccharide unit. Since proteoglycans are made up of polysaccharides, they are a type of heavily glycosylated glycoconjugates. Serine (Ser) residues of the protein serve as the point of attachment to the glycosaminoglycan chains and the attachment occurs through a trisaccharide bridge. The serine residue generally occurs in the Ser-Gly/Ala-X-Gly sequence where the X can be any of the amino acids. But, not all serine residues are attached to GAG chains. Under physiological conditions, the GAG chains are negatively-charged due to the presence of sulfate and uronic acid groups.   Difference Between Proteoglycan and Glycoprotein_Figure 1 


Figure 1: Proteoglycan








Proteoglycans are one of the main constituents of the extracellular matrix (ECM), which fills the space around cells. They combine with collagen to form cartilages to provide structural and mechanical support. Also, by the hydration due to the association of water with proteoglycans, cartilages provide cushioning effect to the joints. However, the insufficient breakdown of proteoglycans in the body is linked to several genetic diseases and can lead to some disease conditions.
A glycoprotein is another type of glycoconjugate, which is less heavily glycosylated. In glycoproteins, oligosaccharide chains or glycans are the type of carbohydrates covalently attached to the core protein. The attachment of oligosaccharides occurs either during cotranslational or posttranslational modifications known as glycosylation. Generally, the extracellular proteins that are going to be secreted are glycosylated in the endoplasmic reticulum. Also, the extracellular segments of the proteins are glycosylated. This means most proteins in the cell membrane are glycoproteins. The main function of the proteins in the cell membrane is to serve as recognition molecules and they are involved in cell signaling as well.
 Difference Between Proteoglycan and Glycoprotein_Figure 2 

Figure 2: Glycoprotein in the Cell Membrane
The two main types of glycoproteins are O-linked glycoproteins and N-linked glycoproteins. In O-linked glycoproteins, the carbohydrate links through the O atom of the –OH group of the amino acids, serine or threonine. In N-linked glycoproteins, the carbohydrate links through the N atom of the –NH2 group of amino acid, asparagine.
Similarities Between Proteoglycan and Glycoprotein
* Proteoglycan and glycoprotein are two types of glycoconjugates.
* Both are made up of proteins to which carbohydrates are covalently attached.
* They occur in the extracellular matrix.
* They are involved in human tissue processes as well as immunological functions.
* Also, their effect on wound healing, viral pathogens, and liver cancer are evaluated by scientists
Differences between glycoproteins and proteoglycans:
* Proteoglycans are the proteins covalently attached to the glycosaminoglycans while glycoproteins are the proteins covalently attached to oligosaccharides. 
* Proteoglycans mainly occur in connective tissue while glycoproteins mainly occur in the cell surface. 
* Proteoglycans provide strength and cushioning effect to the cartilage and glycoproteins serve as integral membrane proteins in cell recognition and cell signaling. 
* The main difference between proteoglycan and glycoprotein is the type of carbohydrates attached to the protein, the location, and the function.






Types of natural antigens:
a) according to the chemical composition, might be proteins, polysaccharides, nucleic acids, lipids or their complexes (glucoproteins, lipoproteins and nucleicproteins). The most common immune responses are those to proteins. Nucleic acids are poor immunogens by themselves, but they become immunogenic when they are conjugated to protein carriers. Lipids are usually not immunogenic, but an immune response to lipids may be induced if the lipids are conjugated to protein carriers. Polysaccharides are potentially, but not always, immunogenic.
b) According to their physical properties: soluble or insoluble in biological liquids.
c) According to their localization: superficial or intracellular.
d) According to their origin: - autoantigen: antigens of a certain species - alloantigens: antigens of a certain group of individuals of a certain species - xenoantigens: antigens from different species




3. Structure and functions of glycerolipids (triglycerides and phosphoglycerolipids).
Glycerolipids are a structurally heterogeneous group of lipids that play key structural and functional roles in bacterial, plant, and animal membranes. They all have at least one hydrophobic chain linked to a glycerol backbone in an ester or ether linkage. 


A glycerolipid is comprised of a glycerol backbone and at least one fatty acid. Glycerolipids act as energy storage. Thus, much of the storage fat in animal’s adipose tissues is comprised mainly of glycerolipids.


One of the most commonly known glycerolipids is the triglyceride (also referred to as triacylglycerol). The triglyceride is an energy-rich compound consisting of a glycerol and three fatty acids (thus, the name). The three hydroxyl groups of glycerol in triglyceride are all esterified. The triglyceride is a major component of animal and plant oils and fats. In plants, they are typically found in plant cell membrane where the fatty acids are mostly unsaturated. In animals, the fatty acid component is largely saturated. Triglycerides store unused calories and provide your body with energy. Cholesterol is used to build cells and certain hormones.


Other examples of glycerolipids are monoglycerides and diglycerides. Monoglyceride, as the name implies, has a glycerol linked to only one fatty acid. The two constituents are linked together via an ester bond. Diglyceride is a glycerolipid comprised of a glycerol and two fatty acid chains that are joined also by ester linkages.


Glyceroglycolipids (also referred to as glycerolipid glycans) may be considered as a subclass of glycerolipids. A glyceroglycolipid is made up of a glycerol backbone and at least one fatty acid. It is often found as a component of biological membranes with photosynthetic functions (e.g. chloroplasts). Galactolipids and sulfolipids are examples of glyceroglycolipids.


Glycerophospholipids are amphipathic lipids, and are the abundant membrane lipids of bacteria and mammalian cells. They have a structural role in forming the bilayer of biological membranes and the monolayer of lipoproteins.


4. Structure and functions of nucleic acids (DNA and different types of RNA). Chromosomes, genes, alleles, the genetic code. 
A DNA strand is a polymer of nucleoside monophosphates held together by phosphodiester bonds. Two such paired strands make up the DNA molecule, which is then twisted into a helix. In the most common Bform, the DNA helix has a repeat of 10.5 base pairs per turn, with sugars and phosphate forming the covalent phosphodiester “backbone” of the molecule and the adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine bases oriented in the middle where they form the now familiar base pairs that look like the rungs of a ladder.
Building blocks
The term nucleotide refers to the building blocks of both DNA (deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates, dNTPs) and RNA (ribonucleoside triphosphates, NTPs). In order to discuss this important group of molecules, it is necessary to define some terms.
Nucleotides contain three primary structural components. These are a nitrogenous base, a pentose sugar, and at least one phosphate. Molecules that contain only a sugar and a nitrogenous base (no phosphate) are called nucleosides. The nitrogenous bases found in nucleic acids include adenine and guanine (called purines) and cytosine, uracil, or thymine (called pyrimidines). There are two sugars found in nucleotides - deoxyribose and ribose (Figure 2.128). By convention, the carbons on these sugars are labeled 1’ to 5’. (This is to distinguish the carbons on the sugars from those on the bases, which have their carbons simply labeled as 1, 2, 3, etc.) Deoxyribose differs from ribose at the 2’ position, with ribose having an OH group, where deoxyribose has H.
  

Nucleotides containing deoxyribose are called deoxyribonucleotides and are the forms found in DNA. Nucleotides containing ribose are called ribonucleotides and are found in RNA. Both DNA and RNA contain nucleotides with adenine, guanine, and cytosine, but with very minor exceptions, RNA contains uracil nucleotides, whereas DNA contains thymine nucleotides. When a base is attached to a sugar, the product, a nucleoside, gains a new name.
* uracil-containing = uridine (attached to ribose) / deoxyuridine (attached to deoxyribose)
* thymine-containing = ribothymidine (attached to ribose) / thymidine (attached to deoxyribose)
* cytosine-containing = cytidine (attached to ribose - Figure 2.129) / deoxycytidine (attached to deoxyribose)
* guanine-containing = guanosine (attached to ribose) / deoxyguanosine (attached to deoxyribose)
* adenine-containing = adenosine (attached to ribose) / deoxyadenosine (attached to deoxyribose)
Of these, deoxyuridine and ribothymidine are the least common. The addition of one or more phosphates to a nucleoside makes it a nucleotide. Nucleotides are often referred to as nucleoside phosphates, for this reason. The number of phosphates in the nucleotide is indicated by the appropriate prefixes (mono, di or tri).
Individual deoxyribonucleotides are derived from corresponding ribonucleoside diphosphates via catalysis by the enzyme known as ribonucleotide reductase (RNR). The deoxyribonucleoside diphosphates are then converted to the corresponding triphosphates (dNTPs) by the addition of a phosphate group. Synthesis of nucleotides containing thymine is distinct from synthesis of all of the other nucleotides and will be discussed later.
Building DNA strands
Each DNA strand is built from dNTPs by the formation of a phosphodiester bond, catalyzed by DNA polymerase, between the 3’OH of one nucleotide and the 5’ phosphate of the next. The result of this directional growth of the strand is that the one end of the strand has a free 5’ phosphate and the other a free 3’ hydroxyl group. These are designated as the 5’ and 3’ ends of the strand.
  
 
Hydrogen bonds between the base pairs hold a nucleic acid duplex together, with two hydrogen bonds per A-T pair (or per A-U pair in RNA) and three hydrogen bonds per G-C pair. The B-form of DNA has a prominent major groove and a minor groove tracing the path of the helix. Proteins, such as transcription factors bind in these grooves and access the hydrogen bonds of the base pairs to “read” the sequence therein.
RNA
The structure of RNA is very similar to that of a single strand of DNA. Built of ribonucleotides, joined together by the same sort of phosphodiester bonds as in DNA, RNA uses uracil in place of thymine. In cells, RNA is assembled by RNA polymerases, which copy a DNA template in the much same way that DNA polymerases replicate a parental strand. During the synthesis of RNA, uracil is used across from an adenine in the DNA template. The building of messenger RNAs by copying a DNA template is a crucial step in the transfer of the information in DNA to a form that directs the synthesis of protein. Additionally, ribosomal and transfer RNAs serve important roles in “reading” the information in the mRNA codons and in polypeptide synthesis. RNAs are also known to play important roles in the regulation of gene expression.
Of the many types of RNA, the three most well-known and most commonly studied are messenger RNA (mRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), which are present in all organisms. These and other types of RNAs primarily carry out biochemical reactions, similar to enzymes. Some, however, also have complex regulatory functions in cells. Owing to their involvement in many regulatory processes, to their abundance, and to their diverse functions, RNAs play important roles in both normal cellular processes and diseases.
In protein synthesis, mRNA carries genetic codes from the DNA in the nucleus to ribosomes, the sites of protein translation in the cytoplasm. Ribosomes are composed of rRNA and protein. The ribosome protein subunits are encoded by rRNA and are synthesized in the nucleolus. Once fully assembled, they move to the cytoplasm, where, as key regulators of translation, they “read” the code carried by mRNA. A sequence of three nitrogenous bases in mRNA specifies incorporation of a specific amino acid in the sequence that makes up the protein. Molecules of tRNA (sometimes also called soluble, or activator, RNA), which contain fewer than 100 nucleotides, bring the specified amino acids to the ribosomes, where they are linked to form proteins.
In addition to mRNA, tRNA, and rRNA, RNAs can be broadly divided into coding (cRNA) and noncoding RNA (ncRNA). There are two types of ncRNAs, housekeeping ncRNAs (tRNA and rRNA) and regulatory ncRNAs, which are further classified according to their size. Long ncRNAs (lncRNA) have at least 200 nucleotides, while small ncRNAs have fewer than 200 nucleotides. Small ncRNAs are subdivided into micro RNA (miRNA), small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA), small nuclear RNA (snRNA), small-interfering RNA (siRNA), and PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA).




A chromosome is an organized package of DNA found in the nucleus of the cell. Different organisms have different numbers of chromosomes. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes--22 pairs of numbered chromosomes, called autosomes, and one pair of sex chromosomes, X and Y. Each parent contributes one chromosome to each pair so that offspring get half of their chromosomes from their mother and half from their father.
A gene is the basic physical and functional unit of heredity. Genes are made up of DNA. Some genes act as instructions to make molecules called proteins. However, many genes do not code for proteins. In humans, genes vary in size from a few hundred DNA bases to more than 2 million bases. Every person has two copies of each gene, one inherited from each parent. Most genes are the same in all people, but a small number of genes (less than 1 percent of the total) are slightly different between people.
Allele, also called allelomorph, any one of two or more genes that may occur alternatively at a given site (locus) on a chromosome. Alleles may occur in pairs, or there may be multiple alleles affecting the expression (phenotype) of a particular trait. The combination of alleles that an organism carries constitutes its genotype. If the paired alleles are the same, the organism’s genotype is said to be homozygous for that trait; if they are different, the organism’s genotype is heterozygous. A dominant allele will override the traits of a recessive allele in a heterozygous pairing. In some traits, however, alleles may be codominant—i.e., neither acts as dominant or recessive. An example is the human ABO blood group system; persons with type AB blood have one allele for A and one for B. (Persons with neither are type O.) Most traits are determined by more than two alleles. Multiple forms of the allele may exist, though only two will attach to the designated gene site during meiosis. Also, some traits are controlled by two or more gene sites. Both possibilities multiply the number of alleles involved. All genetic traits are the result of the interactions of alleles. Mutation, crossing over, and environmental conditions selectively change the frequency of phenotypes (and thus their alleles) within a population. For example, alleles that are carried by individuals with high fitness (meaning they successfully reproduce and pass their genes to their offspring) have a higher likelihood of persisting in a population than alleles carried by less-fit individuals, which are gradually lost from the population over time.
Genetic code, the sequence of nucleotides in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA) that determines the amino acid sequence of proteins. Though the linear sequence of nucleotides in DNA contains the information for protein sequences, proteins are not made directly from DNA. Instead, a messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule is synthesized from the DNA and directs the formation of the protein. RNA is composed of four nucleotides: adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C), and uracil (U). Three adjacent nucleotides constitute a unit known as the codon, which codes for an amino acid.
















  

  



















The structure of a nucleotide is shown below:
  







5. Vitamins. Classification and biologically active derivatives.
Vitamin, any of several organic substances that are necessary in small quantities for normal health and growth in higher forms of animal life. Vitamins are distinct in several ways from other biologically important compounds such as proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids. Although these latter substances also are indispensable for proper bodily functions, almost all of them can be synthesized by animals in adequate quantities. Vitamins, on the other hand, generally cannot be synthesized in amounts sufficient to meet bodily needs and therefore must be obtained from the diet or from some synthetic source. For this reason, vitamins are called essential nutrients. Vitamins also differ from the other biological compounds in that relatively small quantities are needed to complete their functions. In general these functions are of a catalytic or regulatory nature, facilitating or controlling vital chemical reactions in the body’s cells. If a vitamin is absent from the diet or is not properly absorbed by the body, a specific deficiency disease may develop.








vitamin
	alternative names/forms
	biological function
	symptoms of deficiency
	Water-soluble
	thiamin
	vitamin B1
	component of a coenzyme in carbohydrate metabolism; supports normal nerve function
	impairment of the nerves and heart muscle wasting
	riboflavin
	vitamin B2
	component of coenzymes required for energy production and lipid, vitamin, mineral, and drug metabolism; antioxidant
	inflammation of the skin, tongue, and lips; ocular disturbances; nervous symptoms
	niacin
	nicotinic acid, nicotinamide
	component of coenzymes used broadly in cellular metabolism, oxidation of fuel molecules, and fatty acid and steroid synthesis
	skin lesions, gastrointestinal disturbances, nervous symptoms
	vitamin B6
	pyridoxine, pyridoxal, pyridoxamine
	component of coenzymes in metabolism of amino acids and other nitrogen-containing compounds; synthesis of hemoglobin, neurotransmitters; regulation of blood glucose levels
	dermatitis, mental depression, confusion, convulsions, anemia
	folic acid
	folate, folacin, pteroylglutamic acid
	component of coenzymes in DNA synthesis, metabolism of amino acids; required for cell division, maturation of red blood cells
	impaired formation of red blood cells, weakness, irritability, headache, palpitations, inflammation of mouth, neural tube defects in fetus
	vitamin B12
	cobalamin, cyanocobalamin
	cofactor for enzymes in metabolism of amino acids (including folic acid) and fatty acids; required for new cell synthesis, normal blood formation, and neurological function
	smoothness of the tongue, gastrointestinal disturbances, nervous symptoms
	pantothenic acid
	

	as component of coenzyme A, essential for metabolism of carbohydrate, protein, and fat; cofactor for elongation of fatty acids
	weakness, gastrointestinal disturbances, nervous symptoms, fatigue, sleep disturbances, restlessness, nausea
	biotin
	

	cofactor in carbohydrate, fatty acid, and amino acid metabolism
	dermatitis, hair loss, conjunctivitis, neurological symptoms
	vitamin C
	ascorbic acid
	antioxidant; synthesis of collagen, carnitine, amino acids, and hormones; immune function; enhances absorption of non-heme iron (from plant foods)
	swollen and bleeding gums, soreness and stiffness of the joints and lower extremities, bleeding under the skin and in deep tissues, slow wound healing, anemia
	Fat-soluble
	vitamin A
	retinol, retinal, retinoic acid, beta-carotene (plant version)
	normal vision, integrity of epithelial cells (mucous membranes and skin), reproduction, embryonic development, growth, immune response
	ocular disturbances leading to blindness, growth retardation, dry skin, diarrhea, vulnerability to infection
	vitamin D
	calciferol, calatriol (1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D1 or vitamin D hormone), cholecalciferol (D3; plant version), ergocalciferol (D2; animal version)
	maintenance of blood calcium and phosphorus levels, proper mineralization of bones
	defective bone growth in children, soft bones in adults
	vitamin E
	alpha-tocopherol, tocopherol, tocotrienol
	antioxidant; interruption of free radical chain reactions; protection of polyunsaturated fatty acids, cell membranes
	peripheral neuropathy, breakdown of red blood cells
	vitamin K
	phylloquinone, menaquinone, menadione, naphthoquinone
	synthesis of proteins involved in blood coagulation and bone metabolism
	impaired clotting of the blood and internal bleeding
	

    6. Reversible inhibition of enzyme activity. Physiological regulation of enzyme activity (allosteric regulation and covalent modifications). 
An irreversible inhibitor inactivates an enzyme by bonding covalently to a particular group at the active site. The inhibitor-enzyme bond is so strong that the inhibition cannot be reversed by the addition of excess substrate. The nerve gases, especially Diisopropyl fluorophosphate (DIFP), irreversibly inhibit biological systems by forming an enzyme-inhibitor complex with a specific OH group of serine situated at the active sites of certain enzymes. The peptidases trypsin and chymotrypsin contain serine groups at the active site and are inhibited by DIFP.
 imageedit_22_3652346942.jpg 

A reversible inhibitor inactivates an enzyme through noncovalent, more easily reversed, interactions. Unlike an irreversible inhibitor, a reversible inhibitor can dissociate from the enzyme. Reversible inhibitors include competitive inhibitors and noncompetitive inhibitors. (There are additional types of reversible inhibitors.) A competitive inhibitor is any compound that bears a structural resemblance to a particular substrate and thus competes with that substrate for binding at the active site of an enzyme. The inhibitor is not acted on by the enzyme but does prevent the substrate from approaching the active site.
The degree to which a competitive inhibitor interferes with an enzyme’s activity depends on the relative concentrations of the substrate and the inhibitor. If the inhibitor is present in relatively large quantities, it will initially block most of the active sites. But because the binding is reversible, some substrate molecules will eventually bind to the active site and be converted to product. Increasing the substrate concentration promotes displacement of the inhibitor from the active site. Competitive inhibition can be completely reversed by adding substrate so that it reaches a much higher concentration than that of the inhibitor.
A classic example of competitive inhibition is the effect of malonate on the enzyme activity of succinate dehydrogenase Malonate and succinate are the anions of dicarboxylic acids and contain three and four carbon atoms, respectively. The malonate molecule binds to the active site because the spacing of its carboxyl groups is not greatly different from that of succinate. However, no catalytic reaction occurs because malonate does not have a CH2CH2 group to convert to CH=CH. 
 imageedit_5_3264962054.jpg 

Some reversible inhibitors are noncompetitive. A noncompetitive inhibitor can combine with either the free enzyme or the enzyme-substrate complex because its binding site on the enzyme is distinct from the active site. Binding of this kind of inhibitor alters the three-dimensional conformation of the enzyme, changing the configuration of the active site with one of two results. Either the enzyme-substrate complex does not form at its normal rate, or, once formed, it does not yield products at the normal rate. Because the inhibitor does not structurally resemble the substrate, the addition of excess substrate does not reverse the inhibitory effect.
Feedback inhibition is a normal biochemical process that makes use of noncompetitive inhibitors to control some enzymatic activity. In this process, the final product inhibits the enzyme that catalyzes the first step in a series of reactions. Feedback inhibition is used to regulate the synthesis of many amino acids. For example, bacteria synthesize isoleucine from threonine in a series of five enzyme-catalyzed steps. As the concentration of isoleucine increases, some of it binds as a noncompetitive inhibitor to the first enzyme of the series (threonine deaminase), thus bringing about a decrease in the amount of isoleucine being formed.




Temperature
As temperature increases to the optimum, the kinetic energy of the enzyme and substrate increases, causing more collisions between the enzyme and substrate. This causes the formation of more enzyme-substrate complexes, leading to an increase in enzyme activity. An increase in temperature beyond the optimum causes the enzyme’s active site to become denatured.




This means the active site loses its important shape and can no longer form enzyme-substrate complexes, leading to a decrease in enzyme activity.
  

Denaturation is a permanent change.
Some enzymes (e.g. in biological washing powders) are thermostable, meaning they can work at a wide range of temperatures.This allows biological washing powder to be used at low temperatures that saves energy and money.
PH
.  
Deviating from the optimum pH (too high or too low) causes the enzyme’s active site to become denatured and the active site loses its important shape.


Enzyme concentration
  

The higher the enzyme concentration, the more enzymes there are to form enzyme-substrate complexes, leading to an increase in enzyme activity.
This happens up to a certain point. Enzyme activity then levels off (plateaus) as there are not enough substrate molecules to react with the extra enzymes.
Optimum
The optimum value for these factors is the value that allows the maximum rate of reaction




Allosteric regulation refers to the process for modulating the activity of a protein by the binding of a ligand, called an effector, to a site topographically distinct from the site of the protein, called the active site, in which the activity characterizing the protein is carried out, whether catalytic (in the case of enzymes) or binding (in the case of receptors) in nature. The modulation of protein activity is accomplished by the reversible alteration of the protein conformation that accompanies effector binding. Effectors that increase activity are called activators, while those that decrease activity are called inhibitors. 


Covalent modifications are enzyme-catalysed alterations of synthesised proteins and include the addition or removal of chemical groups. Modifications can target a single type of amino acid or multiple amino acids and will change the chemical properties of the site. The examples of the covalent modification strategy are acetylation/deacytilation; phosphorylation/dephosphorilation; myristoylation; ADP ribosylation; farnesylation; sulfation; ubiquitination. However, phosphorylation and acytilation are the most common examples.




7. Mechanism of semiconservative DNA replication. DNA polymerases. DNA repair mechanisms.
DNA replication is semiconservative, meaning that each strand in the DNA double helix acts as a template for the synthesis of a new, complementary strand.
This process takes us from one starting molecule to two "daughter" molecules, with each newly formed double helix containing one new and one old strand.
 Schematic of Watson and Crick's basic model of DNA replication.

1. DNA double helix.

2. Hydrogen bonds break and helix opens.

3. Each strand of DNA acts as a template for synthesis of a new, complementary strand.

4. Replication produces two identical DNA double helices, each with one new and one old strand. 



Schematic of Watson and Crick's basic model of DNA replication.
1. DNA double helix.
2. Hydrogen bonds break and helix opens.
3. Each strand of DNA acts as a template for synthesis of a new, complementary strand.
4. Replication produces two identical DNA double helices, each with one new and one old strand.


Cells need to copy their DNA very quickly, and with very few errors (or risk problems such as cancer). To do so, they use a variety of enzymes and proteins, which work together to make sure DNA replication is performed smoothly and accurately.
DNA polymerase
One of the key molecules in DNA replication is the enzyme DNA polymerase. DNA polymerases are responsible for synthesizing DNA: they add nucleotides one by one to the growing DNA chain, incorporating only those that are complementary to the template.
  

Here are some key features of DNA polymerases:
* They always need a template
* They can only add nucleotides to the 3' end of a DNA strand
* They can't start making a DNA chain from scratch, but require a pre-existing chain or short stretch of nucleotides called a primer
* They proofread, or check their work, removing the vast majority of "wrong" nucleotides that are accidentally added to the chain
The addition of nucleotides requires energy. This energy comes from the nucleotides themselves, which have three phosphates attached to them (much like the energy-carrying molecule ATP). When the bond between phosphates is broken, the energy released is used to form a bond between the incoming nucleotide and the growing chain.
In prokaryotes such as E. coli, there are two main DNA polymerases involved in DNA replication: DNA pol III (the major DNA-maker), and DNA pol I, which plays a crucial supporting role.
Starting DNA replication
How do DNA polymerases and other replication factors know where to begin? Replication always starts at specific locations on the DNA, which are called origins of replication and are recognized by their sequence.
E. coli, like most bacteria, has a single origin of replication on its chromosome. The origin is about 245 base pairs long and has mostly A/T base pairs (which are held together by fewer hydrogen bonds than G/C base pairs), making the DNA strands easier to separate.
Specialized proteins recognize the origin, bind to this site, and open up the DNA. As the DNA opens, two Y-shaped structures called replication forks are formed, together making up what's called a replication bubble. The replication forks will move in opposite directions as replication proceeds. Bacterial chromosome. The double-stranded DNA of the circular bacteria chromosome is opened at the origin of replication, forming a replication bubble. Each end of the bubble is a replication fork, a Y-shaped junction where double-stranded DNA is separated into two single strands. New DNA complementary to each single strand is synthesized at each replication fork. The two forks move in opposite directions around the circumference of the bacterial chromosome, creating a larger and larger replication bubble that grows at both ends.  






Bacterial chromosome. The double-stranded DNA of the circular bacteria chromosome is opened at the origin of replication, forming a replication bubble. Each end of the bubble is a replication fork, a Y-shaped junction where double-stranded DNA is separated into two single strands. New DNA complementary to each single strand is synthesized at each replication fork. The two forks move in opposite directions around the circumference of the bacterial chromosome, creating a larger and larger replication bubble that grows at both ends.


How does replication actually get going at the forks? Helicase is the first replication enzyme to load on at the origin of replication. Helicase's job is to move the replication forks forward by "unwinding" the DNA (breaking the hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous base pairs).
Proteins called single-strand binding proteins coat the separated strands of DNA near the replication fork, keeping them from coming back together into a double helix.
Primers and primase
DNA polymerases can only add nucleotides to the 3' end of an existing DNA strand. (They use the free -OH group found at the 3' end as a "hook," adding a nucleotide to this group in the polymerization reaction.) How, then, does DNA polymerase add the first nucleotide at a new replication fork?
Alone, it can't! The problem is solved with the help of an enzyme called primase. Primase makes an RNA primer, or short stretch of nucleic acid complementary to the template, that provides a 3' end for DNA polymerase to work on. A typical primer is about five to ten nucleotides long. The primer primes DNA synthesis, i.e., gets it started.
Once the RNA primer is in place, DNA polymerase "extends" it, adding nucleotides one by one to make a new DNA strand that's complementary to the template strand.
Leading and lagging strands
In E. coli, the DNA polymerase that handles most of the synthesis is DNA polymerase III. There are two molecules of DNA polymerase III at a replication fork, each of them hard at work on one of the two new DNA strands.
DNA polymerases can only make DNA in the 5' to 3' direction, and this poses a problem during replication. A DNA double helix is always anti-parallel; in other words, one strand runs in the 5' to 3' direction, while the other runs in the 3' to 5' direction. This makes it necessary for the two new strands, which are also antiparallel to their templates, to be made in slightly different ways.
One new strand, which runs 5' to 3' towards the replication fork, is the easy one. This strand is made continuously, because the DNA polymerase is moving in the same direction as the replication fork. This continuously synthesized strand is called the leading strand.
  

The other new strand, which runs 5' to 3' away from the fork, is trickier. This strand is made in fragments because, as the fork moves forward, the DNA polymerase (which is moving away from the fork) must come off and reattach on the newly exposed DNA. This tricky strand, which is made in fragments, is called the lagging strand.
The small fragments are called Okazaki fragments, named for the Japanese scientist who discovered them. The leading strand can be extended from one primer alone, whereas the lagging strand needs a new primer for each of the short Okazaki fragments.
The maintenance and cleanup crew
Some other proteins and enzymes, in addition the main ones above, are needed to keep DNA replication running smoothly. One is a protein called the sliding clamp, which holds DNA polymerase III molecules in place as they synthesize DNA. The sliding clamp is a ring-shaped protein and keeps the DNA polymerase of the lagging strand from floating off when it re-starts at a new Okazaki fragment.
Topoisomerase also plays an important maintenance role during DNA replication. This enzyme prevents the DNA double helix ahead of the replication fork from getting too tightly wound as the DNA is opened up. It acts by making temporary nicks in the helix to release the tension, then sealing the nicks to avoid permanent damage.
Finally, there is a little cleanup work to do if we want DNA that doesn't contain any RNA or gaps. The RNA primers are removed and replaced by DNA through the activity of DNA polymerase I, the other polymerase involved in replication. The nicks that remain after the primers are replaced get sealed by the enzyme DNA ligase.


8. Transcription. The promoter and the initiation of transcription. RNA polymerases. Regulation of transcription. 
Transcription is the first step in gene expression, in which information from a gene is used to construct a functional product such as a protein. The goal of transcription is to make a RNA copy of a gene's DNA sequence. For a protein-coding gene, the RNA copy, or transcript, carries the information needed to build a polypeptide (protein or protein subunit). Eukaryotic transcripts need to go through some processing steps before translation into proteins.
 In transcription, a region of DNA opens up. One strand, the template strand, serves as a template for synthesis of a complementary RNA transcript. The other strand, the coding strand, is identical to the RNA transcript in sequence, except that it has uracil (U) bases in place of thymine (T) bases.

Example:

Coding strand: 5'-ATGATCTCGTAA-3'
Template strand: 3'-TACTAGAGCATT-5'
RNA transcript: 5'-AUGAUCUCGUAA-3'

For a protein-coding gene, the RNA transcript contains the information needed to synthesize a polypeptide (protein or protein subunit) with a particular amino acid sequence. In this case:

RNA transcript (acting as messenger RNA): 5'-AUGAUCUCGUAA-3'
Polypeptide: Met-Ile-Ser-STOP 

RNA polymerase:
The main enzyme involved in transcription is RNA polymerase, which uses a single-stranded DNA template to synthesize a complementary strand of RNA. Specifically, RNA polymerase builds an RNA strand in the 5' to 3' direction, adding each new nucleotide to the 3' end of the strand.
 RNA polymerase synthesizes an RNA strand complementary to a template DNA strand. It synthesizes the RNA strand in the 5' to 3' direction, while reading the template DNA strand in the 3' to 5' direction. The template DNA strand and RNA strand are antiparallel.

RNA transcript: 5'-UGGUAGU...-3' (dots indicate where nucleotides are still being added at 3' end)
DNA template: 3'-ACCATCAGTC-5' 

Stages of transcription:
Transcription of a gene takes place in three stages: initiation, elongation, and termination. Here, we will briefly see how these steps happen in bacteria. 
1. Initiation. RNA polymerase binds to a sequence of DNA called the promoter, found near the beginning of a gene. Each gene (or group of co-transcribed genes, in bacteria) has its own promoter. Once bound, RNA polymerase separates the DNA strands, providing the single-stranded template needed for transcription.
 The promoter region comes before (and slightly overlaps with) the transcribed region whose transcription it specifies. It contains recognition sites for RNA polymerase or its helper proteins to bind to. The DNA opens up in the promoter region so that RNA polymerase can begin transcription. 
2. The promoter region comes before (and slightly overlaps with) the transcribed region whose transcription it specifies. It contains recognition sites for RNA polymerase or its helper proteins to bind to. The DNA opens up in the promoter region so that RNA polymerase can begin transcription.
3. Elongation. One strand of DNA, the template strand, acts as a template for RNA polymerase. As it "reads" this template one base at a time, the polymerase builds an RNA molecule out of complementary nucleotides, making a chain that grows from 5' to 3'. The RNA transcript carries the same information as the non-template (coding) strand of DNA, but it contains the base uracil (U) instead of thymine (T). 
4. RNA polymerase synthesizes an RNA transcript complementary to the DNA template strand in the 5' to 3' direction. It moves forward along the template strand in the 3' to 5' direction, opening the DNA double helix as it goes. The synthesized RNA only remains bound to the template strand for a short while, then exits the polymerase as a dangling string, allowing the DNA to close back up and form a double helix. RNA polymerase synthesizes an RNA transcript complementary to the DNA template strand in the 5' to 3' direction. It moves forward along the template strand in the 3' to 5' direction, opening the DNA double helix as it goes. The synthesized RNA only remains bound to the template strand for a short while, then exits the polymerase as a dangling string, allowing the DNA to close back up and form a double helix.

In this example, the sequences of the coding strand, template strand, and RNA transcript are:

Coding strand: 5' - ATGATCTCGTAA-3'

Template strand: 3'-TACTAGAGCATT-5'

RNA: 5'-AUGAUC...-3' (the dots indicate where nucleotides are still being added to the RNA strand at its 3' end) 
5. In this example, the sequences of the coding strand, template strand, and RNA transcript are:
Coding strand: 5' - ATGATCTCGTAA-3'
Template strand: 3'-TACTAGAGCATT-5'
RNA: 5'-AUGAUC...-3' (the dots indicate where nucleotides are still being added to the RNA strand at its 3' end)
   6. Termination. Sequences called terminators signal that the RNA transcript is complete. Once they are transcribed, they cause the transcript to be released from the RNA polymerase. An example of a termination mechanism involving formation of a hairpin in the RNA is shown below.

   7. The terminator DNA encodes a region of RNA that forms a hairpin structure followed by a string of U nucleotides. The hairpin structure in the transcript causes the RNA polymerase to stall. The U nucleotides that come after the hairpin form weak bonds with the A nucleotides of the DNA template, allowing the transcript to separate from the template and ending transcription. The terminator DNA encodes a region of RNA that forms a hairpin structure followed by a string of U nucleotides. The hairpin structure in the transcript causes the RNA polymerase to stall. The U nucleotides that come after the hairpin form weak bonds with the A nucleotides of the DNA template, allowing the transcript to separate from the template and ending transcription. 
Eukaryotic RNA modifications:
In bacteria, RNA transcripts can act as messenger RNAs (mRNAs) right away. In eukaryotes, the transcript of a protein-coding gene is called a pre-mRNA and must go through extra processing before it can direct translation.
      * Eukaryotic pre-mRNAs must have their ends modified, by addition of a 5' cap (at the beginning) and 3' poly-A tail (at the end).
      * Many eukaryotic pre-mRNAs undergo splicing. In this process, parts of the pre-mRNA (called introns) are chopped out, and the remaining pieces (called exons) are stuck back together.
 Top of image: Diagram of a pre-mRNA with a 5' cap and 3' poly-A tail. The 5' cap is on the 5' end of the pre-mRNA and is a modified G nucleotide. The poly-A tail is on the 3' end of the pre-mRNA and consists of a long string of A nucleotides (only a few of which are shown).

The pre-mRNA still contains both exons and introns. Along the length of the mRNA, there is an alternating pattern of exons and introns: Exon 1 - Intron 1 - Exon 2 - Intron 2 - Exon 3. Each consists of a stretch of RNA nucleotides.

During splicing, the introns are removed from the pre-mRNA, and the exons are stuck together to form a mature mRNA.

Bottom of image:  Mature mRNA that does not contain the intron sequences (Exon 1 - Exon 2 - Exon 3 only). 
      * Top of image: Diagram of a pre-mRNA with a 5' cap and 3' poly-A tail. The 5' cap is on the 5' end of the pre-mRNA and is a modified G nucleotide. The poly-A tail is on the 3' end of the pre-mRNA and consists of a long string of A nucleotides (only a few of which are shown).
      * The pre-mRNA still contains both exons and introns. Along the length of the mRNA, there is an alternating pattern of exons and introns: Exon 1 - Intron 1 - Exon 2 - Intron 2 - Exon 3. Each consists of a stretch of RNA nucleotides.
      * During splicing, the introns are removed from the pre-mRNA, and the exons are stuck together to form a mature mRNA.
      * Bottom of image: Mature mRNA that does not contain the intron sequences (Exon 1 - Exon 2 - Exon 3 only).




End modifications increase the stability of the mRNA, while splicing gives the mRNA its correct sequence. (If the introns are not removed, they'll be translated along with the exons, producing a "gibberish" polypeptide.)


Gene expression is controlled on two levels. First, transcription is controlled by limiting the amount of mRNA that is produced from a particular gene. The second level of control is through post-transcriptional events that regulate the translation of mRNA into proteins. Even after a protein is made, post-translational modifications can affect its activity.
Transcriptional Regulation in Eukaryotes
Regulation of transcription in eukaryotes is a result of the combined effects of structural properties (how DNA is "packaged") and the interactions of proteins called transcription factors. The most important structural difference between eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA is the formation of chromatin in eukaryotes. Chromatin results in the different transcriptional "ground states" of prokaryotes and eukaryotes.


Overview of Differences Between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Gene Expression and Regulation
 
	Prokaryotes
	Eukaryotes
	Structure of genome
	Single, generally circular genome sometimes accompanied by smaller pieces of accessory DNA, like plasmids
	Genome found in chromosomes; nucleosome structure limits DNA accessibility
	Size of genome
	Relatively small
	Relatively large
	Location of gene transcription and translation
	Coupled; no nucleoid envelope barrier because of prokaryotic cell structure
	Nuclear transcription and cytoplasmic translation
	Gene clustering
	Operons where genes with similar function are grouped together
	Operons generally not found in eukaryotes; each gene has its own promoter element and enhancer element(s)
	Default state of transcription
	On
	Off
	DNA structure
	Highly supercoiled DNA with some associated proteins
	Highly supercoiled chromatin associated with histones in nucleosomes
	



Transcription factors (TFs) are regulatory proteins whose function is to activate (or more rarely, to inhibit) transcription of DNA by binding to specific DNA sequences. TFs have defined DNA-binding domains with up to 106-fold higher affinity for their target sequences than for the remainder of the DNA strand. These highly conserved sequences have been used to categorize the known TFs into various "families," such as the MADS box-containing proteins, SOX proteins, and POU factors. Transcription factors can also be classified by their three-dimensional protein structure, including basic helix-turn-helix, helix-loop-helix, and zinc finger proteins. These different structural motifs result in transcription factor specificity for the consensus sequences to which they bind.
Sequence-specific transcription factors are considered the most important and diverse mechanisms of gene regulation in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. In eukaryotes, regulation of gene expression by transcription factors is said to be combinatorial, in that it requires the coordinated interactions of multiple proteins (in contrast to prokaryotes, in which a single protein is usually all that is required).
Many genes, known as housekeeping genes, are needed by almost every type of cell and appear to be unregulated or constitutive. But at the core of cellular differentiation, manifested in the variety of cell types observed in different organisms, is the regulation of gene expression in a tissue-specific manner. The same genome is responsible for making the entire cadre of cell types, each of which has its own function—for example, red blood cells exchange oxygen, muscle cells expand and contract, and cells in the immune system recognize pathogens. Genes that regulate cell identity are turned on under very specific temporal, spatial, and environmental conditions to ensure that a cell is able to perform its designated function.
Take the example of the gene for beta globin, a protein used in red blood cells for oxygen exchange. Every cell in the human body contains the beta globin gene and the corresponding upstream regulatory sequences that regulate expression, but no cell type other than red blood cells expresses beta globin
In many eukaryotic organisms, the promoter contains a conserved gene sequence called the TATA box. Various other consensus sequences also exist and are recognized by the different TF families. Transcription is initiated when one TF binds to one of these promoter sequences, initiating a series of interactions between multiple proteins (activators, regulators, and repressors) at the same site, or other promoter, regulator, and enhancer sequences. Ultimately, a transcription complex is formed at the promoter that facilitates binding and transcription by RNA polymerase.
As in prokaryotes, eukaryotic repressor molecules can sometimes bind to silencer elements in the vicinity of a gene and inhibit the binding, assembly, or activity of the transcription complex, thus turning off expression of a gene. Positive regulation by TFs that are activators is common in eukaryotes.
Even when transcription factors are present in a cell, transcription does not always occur, because often the TFs cannot reach their target sequences. The association of the DNA molecule with proteins is the first step in its silencing. The associated DNA and histone proteins are collectively called chromatin; the complex is tightly bonded by attraction of the negatively charged DNA to the positively charged histones (Table 1). The state of chromatin can limit access of transcription factors and RNA polymerase to DNA promoters, contributing to the restrictive ground state of gene expression. In order for gene transcription to occur, the chromatin structure must be unwound.
Epigenetic mechanisms, including DNA methylation and imprinting, noncoding RNA, post-translational modifications, and other mechanisms, further enrich the cellular portfolio of gene expression control activities.






9. Processing of eukaryotic mRNA. place and mechanism of translation. 
Eukaryotic pre-mRNA receives a 5′ cap and a 3′ poly (A) tail before introns are removed and the mRNA is considered ready for translation.


Pre-mRNA Processing
The eukaryotic pre-mRNA undergoes extensive processing before it is ready to be translated. The additional steps involved in eukaryotic mRNA maturation create a molecule with a much longer half-life than a prokaryotic mRNA. Eukaryotic mRNAs last for several hours, whereas the typical E. coli mRNA lasts no more than five seconds.
Pre-mRNAs are first coated in RNA-stabilizing proteins; these protect the pre-mRNA from degradation while it is processed and exported out of the nucleus. The three most important steps of pre-mRNA processing are the addition of stabilizing and signaling factors at the 5′ and 3′ ends of the molecule, and the removal of intervening sequences that do not specify the appropriate amino acids. In rare cases, the mRNA transcript can be “edited” after it is transcribed.
5′ Capping
While the pre-mRNA is still being synthesized, a 7-methylguanosine cap is added to the 5′ end of the growing transcript by a 5′-to-5′ phosphate linkage. This moiety protects the nascent mRNA from degradation. In addition, initiation factors involved in protein synthesis recognize the cap to help initiate translation by ribosomes.
 image 



3′ Poly-A Tail
While RNA Polymerase II is still transcribing downstream of the proper end of a gene, the pre-mRNA is cleaved by an endonuclease-containing protein complex between an AAUAAA consensus sequence and a GU-rich sequence. This releases the functional pre-mRNA from the rest of the transcript, which is still attached to the RNA Polymerase. An enzyme called poly (A) polymerase (PAP) is part of the same protein complex that cleaves the pre-mRNA and it immediately adds a string of approximately 200 A nucleotides, called the poly (A) tail, to the 3′ end of the just-cleaved pre-mRNA. The poly (A) tail protects the mRNA from degradation, aids in the export of the mature mRNA to the cytoplasm, and is involved in binding proteins involved in initiating translation.
Pre-mRNA Splicing
Eukaryotic genes are composed of exons, which correspond to protein-coding sequences (ex-on signifies that they are expressed), and intervening sequences called introns (int-ron denotes their intervening role), which may be involved in gene regulation, but are removed from the pre-mRNA during processing. Intron sequences in mRNA do not encode functional proteins.
Intron Processing
All introns in a pre-mRNA must be completely and precisely removed before protein synthesis. If the process errs by even a single nucleotide, the reading frame of the rejoined exons would shift, and the resulting protein would be dysfunctional. The process of removing introns and reconnecting exons is called splicing. Introns are removed and degraded while the pre-mRNA is still in the nucleus. Splicing occurs by a sequence-specific mechanism that ensures introns will be removed and exons rejoined with the accuracy and precision of a single nucleotide. The splicing of pre-mRNAs is conducted by complexes of proteins and RNA molecules called spliceosomes. image 














Each spliceosome is composed of five subunits called snRNPs (for small nuclear ribonucleoparticles, and pronounced “snurps”.) Each snRNP is itself a complex of proteins and a special type of RNA found only in the nucleus called snRNAs (small nuclear RNAs). Spliceosomes recognize sequences at the 5′ end of the intron because introns always start with the nucleotides GU and they recognize sequences at the 3′ end of the intron because they always end with the nucleotides AG. The spliceosome cleaves the pre-mRNA’s sugar phosphate backbone at the G that starts the intron and then covalently attaches that G to an internal A nucleotide within the intron. Then the spliceosme connects the 3′ end of the first exon to the 5′ end of the following exon, cleaving the 3′ end of the intron in the process. This results in the splicing together of the two exons and the release of the intron in a lariat form.
 image 



Translation:
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs)
Transfer RNAs, or tRNAs, are molecular "bridges" that connect mRNA codons to the amino acids they encode. One end of each tRNA has a sequence of three nucleotides called an anticodon, which can bind to specific mRNA codons. The other end of the tRNA carries the amino acid specified by the codons.
There are many different types of tRNAs. Each type reads one or a few codons and brings the right amino acid matching those codons.
 Ribosomes are composed of a small and large subunit and have three sites where tRNAs can bind to an mRNA (the A, P, and E sites). Each tRNA vcarries a specific amino acid and binds to an mRNA codon that is complementary to its anticodon. 

Ribosomes are composed of a small and large subunit and have three sites where tRNAs can bind to an mRNA (the A, P, and E sites). Each tRNA carries a specific amino acid and binds to an mRNA codon that is complementary to its anticodon.
Ribosomes
Ribosomes are the structures where polypeptides (proteins) are built. They are made up of protein and RNA (ribosomal RNA, or rRNA). Each ribosome has two subunits, a large one and a small one, which come together around an mRNA—kind of like the two halves of a hamburger bun coming together around the patty.
The ribosome provides a set of handy slots where tRNAs can find their matching codons on the mRNA template and deliver their amino acids. These slots are called the A, P, and E sites. Not only that, but the ribosome also acts as an enzyme, catalyzing the chemical reaction that links amino acids together to make a chain.
Steps of translation:
Your cells are making new proteins every second of the day. And each of those proteins must contain the right set of amino acids, linked together in just the right order. That may sound like a challenging task, but luckily, your cells (along with those of other animals, plants, and bacteria) are up to the job.
To see how cells make proteins, let's divide translation into three stages: initiation (starting off), elongation (adding on to the protein chain), and termination (finishing up).


Getting started: Initiation
In initiation, the ribosome assembles around the mRNA to be read and the first tRNA (carrying the amino acid methionine, which matches the start codon, AUG). This setup, called the initiation complex, is needed in order for translation to get started.
Extending the chain: Elongation
Elongation is the stage where the amino acid chain gets longer. In elongation, the mRNA is read one codon at a time, and the amino acid matching each codon is added to a growing protein chain.
Each time a new codon is exposed:
         * A matching tRNA binds to the codon
         * The existing amino acid chain (polypeptide) is linked onto the amino acid of the tRNA via a chemical reaction
         * The mRNA is shifted one codon over in the ribosome, exposing a new codon for reading
 Elongation has three stages: 

1) The anticodon of an incoming tRNA pairs with the mRNA codon exposed in the A site.

2) A peptide bond is formed between the new amino acid (in the A site) and the previously-added amino acid (in the P site), transferring the polypeptide from the P site to the A site.

3) The ribosome moves one codon down on the mRNA. The tRNA in the A site (carrying the polypeptide) shifts to the P site. The tRNA in the P site shifts to the E site and exits the ribosome. 
Elongation has three stages:
            * 1) The anticodon of an incoming tRNA pairs with the mRNA codon exposed in the A site.
            * 2) A peptide bond is formed between the new amino acid (in the A site) and the previously-added amino acid (in the P site), transferring the polypeptide from the P site to the A site.
            * 3) The ribosome moves one codon down on the mRNA. The tRNA in the A site (carrying the polypeptide) shifts to the P site. The tRNA in the P site shifts to the E site and exits the ribosome.


During elongation, tRNAs move through the A, P, and E sites of the ribosome. This process repeats many times as new codons are read and new amino acids are added to the chain.


Finishing up: Termination
Termination is the stage in which the finished polypeptide chain is released. It begins when a stop codon (UAG, UAA, or UGA) enters the ribosome, triggering a series of events that separate the chain from its tRNA and allow it to drift out of the ribosome.
After termination, the polypeptide may still need to fold into the right 3D shape, undergo processing (such as the removal of amino acids), get shipped to the right place in the cell, or combine with other polypeptides before it can do its job as a functional protein.




10. Glucose oxidation. Aerobic and anaerobic energy metabolism. 
The primary function of the oxidation of glucose to CO2 in the glycolytic pathway and the citric acid cycle is to produce NADH and FADH2, whose oxidation in the mitochondria generates ATP.


In the cytosol of eukaryotic cells, glucose is converted to pyruvate via the glycolytic pathway, with the net formation of two ATPs and the net reduction of two NAD+ molecules to NADH. ATP is formed by two substrate-level phosphorylation reactions in the conversion of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to pyruvate.
In anaerobic cells, pyruvate can be metabolized further to lactate or to ethanol plus CO2, with the reoxidation of NADH.
Mitochondria have a permeable outer membrane and an inner membrane, which is the site of electron transport and ATP synthesis.
Pyruvate dehydrogenase, a very large, multienzyme complex in the mitochondrial matrix converts pyruvate into acetyl CoA and CO2.
In each turn of the citric acid cycle, acetyl CoA condenses with the four-carbon molecule oxaloacetate to form the six-carbon citrate, which is converted back to oxaloacetate by a series of reactions that release two molecules of CO2 and generate three NADH molecules and one FADH2 molecule.
The NADH generated in the cytosol during glycolysis is oxidized to NAD+, with the concomitant reduction of NAD+ to NADH in the mitochondrial matrix, by a set of enzymes and transport proteins that form an electron shuttle.
Electrons from NADH and FADH2 move via a series of membrane-bound electron carriers in the inner mitochondrial membrane to O2, regenerating NAD+ and FAD. This stepwise movement of electrons is coupled to pumping of protons across the inner membrane. The resulting proton-motive force powers ATP synthesis and generates most of the ATP resulting from aerobic oxidation of glucose.
Oxidation of fatty acids in mitochondria yields acetyl CoA, which enters the citric acid cycle, and the reduced coenzymes NADH and FADH2. Subsequent oxidation of acetyl CoA and the reduced coenzymes is coupled to the formation of a proton-motive force that powers ATP formation.
In most eukaryotic cells, oxidation of fatty acids, especially very long chain fatty acids, occurs primarily in peroxisomes and is not linked to ATP production; the released energy is converted to heat. The electrons released during peroxisomal oxidation of fatty acids are used to form H2O2, which is decomposed to H2O and O2 by catalase.
The rate of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle, which depends on the cell’s need for ATP, is controlled by the inhibition and stimulation of several enzymes. This complex regulation coordinates the activities of the glycolytic pathway and the citric acid cycle and results in the storage of glucose (as glycogen) or fat when ATP is abundant.


Metabolism is all the chemical reactions that happen inside a body. Aerobic metabolism is when the body produces energy (in the form of ATP) using oxygen. Anarobic metabolism is when the body produces energy without oxygen. Aerobic metabolism is more efficient at creating energy than anaerobic metabolism.
Aerobic Metabolism vs Anaerobic Metabolism:
The key difference between the two is that aerobic metabolism occurs in the presence of oxygen, while anaerobic metabolism does not.


Although aerobic metabolism is the slower of the two processes, it is far more prevalent and essential for our daily functioning. Representing about 90% of all cellular metabolism, aerobic metabolism is the process by which fats and carbohydrates are converted into usable energy in the form of ATP (adenosine triphosphate). Aerobic metabolism is counted on for the production of energy that can support sustained energetic needs, e.g., walking, jogging, daily exertions.
The conversion of carbohydrates into energy is required every day, for all of your basic functional needs. This is why aerobic metabolism occurs constantly in the body. Aerobic metabolism is also the only means by which your body can extract energy from fat. The amino acids from proteins when broken down for fuel, which mainly happens when the body is short on carbohydrates or fats like during starvation or diabetes, can either be converted to glucose or glycogen, or ketone bodies through a process called ketosis.
 ATP Production Pathways, glycolycess, aerobic metabolism 

Despite being the slower of the two processes, aerobic metabolism is very efficient, and is able to squeeze 34 molecules of ATP from a single molecule of glucose. The additional byproducts include carbon dioxide and water. Aerobic metabolism consists of two different pathways, the Krebs cycle and the electron transport chain, both of which occur in the mitochondria, the energy factories of cells. The raw materials required for these two stages include water and oxygen, but the step preceding these aerobic processes is none other than anaerobic glycolysis, which we will explain below.


Unlike the form explained above, anaerobic metabolism does not require the presence of oxygen to convert raw materials into energy. However, anaerobic glycolysis is far less efficient, producing only two molecules of ATP, in comparison to aerobic metabolism’s 34.
The body relies on anaerobic respiration when a sudden burst of energy is required in a short amount of time. For example, imagine that you are a sprinter or a weightlifter; your physical demands are usually intense, but only for a limited amount of time. Since aerobic metabolism takes more time, the body uses anaerobic metabolism to generate energy for immediate use from carbohydrates, but not fat or protein. Beginning with a single molecule of glucose, the glycolysis process unfolds in the cytoplasm of a cell, and does not require any organelles.
Additionally, for activities such as sprinting or weightlifting, the body is in short supply of oxygen. The heart is pumping blood as fast as it can, but not enough and not in time to satisfy the needs of the muscles or other cells.
Unfortunately, one of the byproducts of anaerobic metabolism is lactic acid, which can cause fatigue. A rapid buildup of lactic acid is what causes cramps in athletes who push themselves too hard without properly warming up – or when the body fails to balance aerobic and anaerobic metabolism.
The body’s default is aerobic metabolism since it is so much more efficient than anaerobic (unless you are an anaerobic bacteria, then oxygen could kill you). Anaerobic respiration is there in case of emergency situations until the body can get back to its original oxygen dependent self.
While the volume and variety of the end products vary, aerobic and anaerobic metabolism are intimately connected. As mentioned earlier, glycolysis is the first step that leads into aerobic respiration, and is therefore happening all the time, just like aerobic metabolism. Essentially, the body needs to “warm up” into the aerobic metabolism of fats, so it begins with pure carbohydrate conversion in the cytoplasm and then transitions into aerobic metabolism.
You don’t notice the negative byproducts of anaerobic metabolism in most cases because your body can eliminate the byproducts faster than you can produce them. Imagine that you take a long, leisurely walk through the park. Your body will be undergoing anaerobic and aerobic metabolism, but provided you have eaten enough food that morning, are moving at a normal pace, and not overly exerting yourself, you probably won’t break a sweat or develop a lactic acid cramp. So long as the body’s aerobic metabolic pathways can keep up with the body’s demands, anaerobic metabolism can take a backseat. When the energy produced by aerobic processes is insufficient, the anaerobic processes take on a bigger role to fill the demand.


Glycolysis:
Glycolysis is a series of reactions that extract energy from glucose by splitting it into two three-carbon molecules called pyruvates. Glycolysis is an ancient metabolic pathway, meaning that it evolved long ago, and it is found in the great majority of organisms alive today.
In organisms that perform cellular respiration, glycolysis is the first stage of this process. However, glycolysis doesn’t require oxygen, and many anaerobic organisms—organisms that do not use oxygen—also have this pathway.
Glycolysis has ten steps, and depending on your interests—and the classes you’re taking—you may want to know the details of all of them. However, you may also be looking for a greatest hits version of glycolysis, something that highlights the key steps and principles without tracing the fate of every single atom. Let’s start with a simplified version of the pathway that does just that.
Glycolysis takes place in the cytosol of a cell, and it can be broken down into two main phases: the energy-requiring phase, above the dotted line in the image below, and the energy-releasing phase, below the dotted line.
            * Energy-requiring phase. In this phase, the starting molecule of glucose gets rearranged, and two phosphate groups are attached to it. The phosphate groups make the modified sugar—now called fructose-1,6-bisphosphate—unstable, allowing it to split in half and form two phosphate-bearing three-carbon sugars. Because the phosphates used in these steps come from ATP, two ATP molecules get used up.
 Simplified diagram of glycolysis.

Energy investment phase. Glucose is first converted to fructose-1,6-bisphosphate in a series of steps that use up two ATP. Then, unstable fructose-1,6-bisphosphate splits in two, forming two three-carbon molecules called DHAP and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphae. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate can continue with the next steps of the pathway, and DHAP can be readily converted into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.

Energy payoff phase. In a series of steps that produce one NADH and two ATP, a glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecule is converted into a pyruvate molecule. This happens twice for each molecule of glucose since glucose is split into two three-carbon molecules, both of which will go through the final steps of the pathway. 

Simplified diagram of glycolysis.
            * Energy investment phase. Glucose is first converted to fructose-1,6-bisphosphate in a series of steps that use up two ATP. Then, unstable fructose-1,6-bisphosphate splits in two, forming two three-carbon molecules called DHAP and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphae. Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate can continue with the next steps of the pathway, and DHAP can be readily converted into glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
            * Energy payoff phase. In a series of steps that produce one NADH and two ATP, a glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate molecule is converted into a pyruvate molecule. This happens twice for each molecule of glucose since glucose is split into two three-carbon molecules, both of which will go through the final steps of the pathway.
The three-carbon sugars formed when the unstable sugar breaks down are different from each other. Only one—glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate—can enter the following step. However, the unfavorable sugar, can be easily converted into the favorable one, so both finish the pathway in the end
            * Energy-releasing phase. In this phase, each three-carbon sugar is converted into another three-carbon molecule, pyruvate, through a series of reactions. In these reactions, two ATPmolecules and one NADH molecule are made. Because this phase takes place twice, once for each of the two three-carbon sugars, it makes four ATP and two NADH overall.
Each reaction in glycolysis is catalyzed by its own enzyme. The most important enzyme for regulation of glycolysis is phosphofructokinase, which catalyzes formation of the unstable, two-phosphate sugar molecule, fructose-1,6-bisphosphate
Phosphofructokinase speeds up or slows down glycolysis in response to the energy needs of the cell.
Overall, glycolysis converts one six-carbon molecule of glucose into two three-carbon molecules of pyruvate. The net products of this process are two molecules of ATP (4 ATP produced −minus 2 ATP used up) and two molecules of NADH.
At the end of glycolysis, we’re left with two ATP, two NADH and two pyruvate molecules. If oxygen is available, the pyruvate can be broken down (oxidized) all the way to carbon dioxide in cellular respiration, making many molecules of ATP during pyruvate oxidation, the citric acid cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation.




11. Citrate cycle and the oxidative phosphorylation. 
Overview of the citric acid cycle
In eukaryotes, the citric acid cycle takes place in the matrix of the mitochondria, just like the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl CoA. In prokaryotes, these steps both take place in the cytoplasm. The citric acid cycle is a closed loop; the last part of the pathway reforms the molecule used in the first step. The cycle includes eight major steps.




  



In the first step of the cycle, acetyl CoA combines with a four-carbon acceptor molecule, oxaloacetate, to form a six-carbon molecule called citrate. After a quick rearrangement, this six-carbon molecule releases two of its carbons as carbon dioxide molecules in a pair of similar reactions, producing a molecule of NADH each time. The enzymes that catalyze these reactions are key regulators of the citric acid cycle, speeding it up or slowing it down based on the cell’s energy needs.
The remaining four-carbon molecule undergoes a series of additional reactions, first making an ATP molecule—or, in some cells, a similar molecule called GTP—then reducing the electron carrier FAD to FADH, and finally generating another NADH. This set of reactions regenerates the starting molecule, oxaloacetate, so the cycle can repeat.
Overall, one turn of the citric acid cycle releases two carbon dioxide molecules and produces three NADH, one FADH, and one ATP or GTP. The citric acid cycle goes around twice for each molecule of glucose that enters cellular respiration because there are two pyruvates—and thus, two acetyl CoAs—made per glucose.
Steps of the citric acid cycle:
Step 1. In the first step of the citric acid cycle, acetyl CoA joins with a four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate, releasing the CoA group and forming a six-carbon molecule called citrate.
Step 2. In the second step, citrate is converted into its isomer, isocitrate. This is actually a two-step process, involving first the removal and then the addition of a water molecule, which is why the citric acid cycle is sometimes described as having nine steps—rather than the eight listed here.
Step 3. In the third step, isocitrate is oxidized and releases a molecule of carbon dioxide, leaving behind a five-carbon molecule—α-ketoglutarate. During this step, NAD is reduced to form NADH. The enzyme catalyzing this step, isocitrate dehydrogenase, is important in regulating the speed of the citric acid cycle.
Step 4. The fourth step is similar to the third. In this case, it’s α-ketoglutarate that’s oxidized, reducing NAD+ to NADH and releasing a molecule of carbon dioxide in the process. The remaining four-carbon molecule picks up Coenzyme A, forming the unstable compound succinyl CoA. The enzyme catalyzing this step, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, is also important in regulation of the citric acid cycle.
 Detailed diagram of the citric acid cycle, showing the structures of the various cycle intermediates and the enzymes catalyzing each step.

Step 1. Acetyl CoA combines with oxaloacetate in a reaction catalyzed by citrate synthase. This reaction also takes a water molecule as a reactant, and it releases a SH-CoA molecule as a product.

Step 2. Citrate is converted into isocitrate in a reaction catalyzed by aconitase.

Step 3. Isocitrate is converted into α-ketoglutarate in a reaction catalyzed by isocitrate dehydrogenase. An NAD+ molecule is reduced to NADH + H+ in this reaction, and a carbon dioxide molecule is released as a product.

Step 4. α-ketoglutarate is converted to succinyl CoA in a reaction catalyzed by α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. An NAD+ molecule is reduced to NADH + H+ in this reaction, which also takes a SH-CoA molecule as reactant. A carbon dioxide molecule is released as a product. 

Step 5. Succinyl CoA is converted to succinate in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme succinyl-CoA synthetase. This reaction converts inorganic phosphate, Pi, and GDP to GTP and also releases a SH-CoA group.

Step 6. Succinate is converted to fumarate in a reaction catalyzed by succinate dehydrogenase. FAD is reduced to FADH2 in this reaction.

Step 7. Fumarate is converted to malate in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme fumarase. This reaction requires a water molecule as a reactant.

Step 8. Malate is converted to oxaloacetate in a reaction catalyzed by malate dehydrogenase. This reaction reduces an NAD+ molecule to NADH + H+. 

Step 5. In step five, the CoA of succinyl CoA is replaced by a phosphate group, which is then transferred to ADP to make ATP. In some cells, GDP—guanosine diphosphate—is used instead of ADP, forming GTP—guanosine triphosphate—as a product. The four-carbon molecule produced in this step is called succinate. 
Step 6. In step six, succinate is oxidized, forming another four-carbon molecule called fumarate. In this reaction, two hydrogen atoms—with their electrons—are transferred to FAD, producing FADH2. The enzyme that carries out this step is embedded in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion, so FADH2 can transfer its electrons directly into the electron transport chain. 
Step 7. In step seven, water is added to the four-carbon molecule fumarate, converting it into another four-carbon molecule called malate.
Step 8. In the last step of the citric acid cycle, oxaloacetate—the starting four-carbon compound—is regenerated by oxidation of malate. Another molecule of NAD+ is reduced to NADH in the process.
In a single turn of the cycle,
            * two carbons enter from acetyl CoA and two molecules of carbon dioxide are released;
            * three molecules of NADH and one molecule of FADH2 are generated;
            * And one molecule of ATP or GTP is produced.
These figures are for one turn of the cycle, corresponding to one molecule of acetyl CoA. Each glucose produces two acetyl CoA molecules, so we need to multiply these numbers by 2 if we want the per-glucose yield.


Overview: oxidative phosphorylation:
The electron transport chain is a series of proteins and organic molecules found in the inner membrane of the mitochondria. Electrons are passed from one member of the transport chain to another in a series of redox reactions. Energy released in these reactions is captured as a proton gradient, which is then used to make ATP in a process called chemiosmosis. Together, the electron transport chain and chemiosmosis make up oxidative phosphorylation. The key steps of this process, shown in simplified form in the diagram above, include:
            * Delivery of electrons by NADH and FADH2. Reduced electron carriers (NADH and FADH_2) from other steps of cellular respiration transfer their electrons to molecules near the beginning of the transport chain. In the process, they turn back into NAD^+  and FAD, which can be reused in other steps of cellular respiration.
            * Electron transfer and proton pumping. As electrons are passed down the chain, they move from a higher to a lower energy level, releasing energy. Some of the energy is used to pump H^+ ions, moving them out of the matrix and into the intermembrane space. This pumping establishes an electrochemical gradient.
            * Splitting of oxygen to form water. At the end of the electron transport chain, electrons are transferred to molecular oxygen, which splits in half and takes up H^+ to form water.
            * Gradient-driven synthesis of ATP. As H^+ ions flow down their gradient and back into the matrix, they pass through an enzyme called ATP synthase, which harnesses the flow of protons to synthesize ATP.
The electron transport chain:
The electron transport chain is a collection of membrane-embedded proteins and organic molecules, most of them organized into four large complexes labeled I to IV. In eukaryotes, many copies of these molecules are found in the inner mitochondrial membrane. In prokaryotes, the electron transport chain components are found in the plasma membrane.
As the electrons travel through the chain, they go from a higher to a lower energy level, moving from less electron-hungry to more electron-hungry molecules. Energy is released in these “downhill” electron transfers, and several of the protein complexes use the released energy to pump protons from the mitochondrial matrix to the intermembrane space, forming a proton gradient. 
All of the electrons that enter the transport chain come from NADH and FADH2 produced during earlier stages of cellular respiration: glycolysis, pyruvate oxidation, and the citric acid cycle.
            * NADH is very good at donating electrons in redox reactions (that is, its electrons are at a high energy level), so it can transfer its electrons directly to complex I, turning back into NAD+. As electrons move through complex I in a series of redox reactions, energy is released, and the complex uses this energy to pump protons from the matrix into the intermembrane space.
            * FADH2 is not as good at donating electrons as NADH (that is, its electrons are at a lower energy level), so it cannot transfer its electrons to complex I. Instead, it feeds them into the transport chain through complex II, which does not pump protons across the membrane.
Because of this "bypass," each FADH2 molecule causes fewer protons to be pumped (and contributes less to the proton gradient) than an NADH. 
Beyond the first two complexes, electrons from NADH and FADH2 travel exactly the same route. Both complex I and complex II pass their electrons to a small, mobile electron carrier called ubiquinone (Q), which is reduced to form QH2 and travels through the membrane, delivering the electrons to complex III. As electrons move through complex III, more H+ ions are pumped across the membrane, and the electrons are ultimately delivered to another mobile carrier called cytochrome C (cyt C). Cyt C carries the electrons to complex IV, where a final batch of H+ ions is pumped across the membrane. Complex IV passes the electrons to O2, which splits into two oxygen atoms and accepts protons from the matrix to form water. Four electrons are required to reduce each molecule of O2, and two water molecules are formed in the process.
Overall, what does the electron transport chain do for the cell? It has two important functions:
            * Regenerates electron carriers. NADH and FADH2 pass their electrons to the electron transport chain, turning back into NAD+ and FAD. This is important because the oxidized forms of these electron carriers are used in glycolysis and the citric acid cycle and must be available to keep these processes running.
            * Makes a proton gradient. The transport chain builds a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane, with a higher concentration of H+ in the intermembrane space and a lower concentration in the matrix. This gradient represents a stored form of energy, and, as we’ll see, it can be used to make ATP.


Chemiosmosis:
Complexes I, III, and IV of the electron transport chain are proton pumps. As electrons move energetically downhill, the complexes capture the released energy and use it to pump H+ ions from the matrix to the intermembrane space. This pumping forms an electrochemical gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane. The gradient is sometimes called the proton-motive force, and you can think of it as a form of stored energy, kind of like a battery.
Like many other ions, protons can't pass directly through the phospholipid bilayer of the membrane because its core is too hydrophobic. Instead, H+ ions can move down their concentration gradient only with the help of channel proteins that form hydrophilic tunnels across the membrane. 
In the inner mitochondrial membrane, H+ ions have just one channel available: a membrane-spanning protein known as ATP synthase. Conceptually, ATP synthase is a lot like a turbine in a hydroelectric power plant. Instead of being turned by water, it’s turned by the flow of H+ ions moving down their electrochemical gradient. As ATP synthase turns, it catalyzes the addition of a phosphate to ADP, capturing energy from the proton gradient as ATP.
  

This process, in which energy from a proton gradient is used to make ATP, is called chemiosmosis. More broadly, chemiosmosis can refer to any process in which energy stored in a proton gradient is used to do work. Although chemiosmosis accounts for over 80% of ATP made during glucose breakdown in cellular respiration, it’s not unique to cellular respiration. For instance, chemiosmosis is also involved in the light reactions of photosynthesis.
























12. The origin of life. Chemical evolution, the RNA world. Characteristics of prokaryotic cells. Bacterial diseases. 
Perhaps the most fundamental and at the same time the least understood biological problem is the origin of life. It is central to many scientific and philosophical problems and to any consideration of extraterrestrial life. Most of the hypotheses of the origin of life will fall into one of four categories:
            1. The origin of life is a result of a supernatural event—that is, one irretrievably beyond the descriptive powers of physics, chemistry, and other science.
            2. Life, particularly simple forms, spontaneously and readily arises from nonliving matter in short periods of time, today as in the past.
            3. Life is coeternal with matter and has no beginning; life arrived on Earth at the time of Earth’s origin or shortly thereafter.
            4. Life arose on the early Earth by a series of progressive chemical reactions. Such reactions may have been likely or may have required one or more highly improbable chemical events.
A third theory of life’s origin is known as chemical evolution. In this idea, pre-biological changes slowly transform simple atoms and molecules into the more complex chemicals needed to produce life. Favored by most scientists today, the central premise of chemical evolution stipulates that life arose naturally from nonlife. In this sense, the theories of chemical evolution and spontaneous generation are similar, but the timescales differ. Chemical evolution doesn’t occur suddenly; instead, it proceeds more gradually, eventually building complex structures from simpler ones. This modern theory then suggests that life originated on Earth by means of a rather slow evolution of nonliving matter. How slowly and when precisely we are unsure.
Estimates of the timescale over which chemical evolution occurred can be inferred by studying fossils—the hardened remains of dead organisms whose skeletal outlines or bony features are preserved in ancient rocks. 


The RNA World:
The RNA World concept posits that there was a period of time in primitive Earth's history — about 4 billion years ago — when the primary living substance was RNA or something chemically similar. In the past 50 years, this idea has gone from speculation to a prevailing idea. 
The RNA world hypothesis suggests that life on Earth began with a simple RNA molecule that could copy itself without help from other molecules.
DNA, RNA, and proteins are central to life on Earth. DNA stores the instructions for building living things—from bacteria to bumble bees. And proteins drive the chemical reactions needed to keep cells alive and healthy. Until recently, RNA was thought of as little more than a messenger between DNA and proteins, carrying instructions as messenger RNA (mRNA) to build proteins. However, RNA can do far more. It can drive chemical reactions, like proteins, and carries genetic information, like DNA. And because RNA can do both these jobs, most scientists think life as we know it began in an RNA world, without DNA and proteins.
The first RNAs
So how did RNA evolve on Earth? Scientists think RNA building blocks (nucleotides) emerged in a chaotic soup of molecules on early Earth. These nucleotides bonded together to make the first RNAs. No sooner were they made than they broke down; however, new ones were made in their place. Some RNAs turned out to be more stable than others. These RNA strands grew longer and bonded nucleotides more quickly. Eventually, RNA strands grew faster than they broke down. This was RNA’s chance to start life.
RNA offspring
All living things reproduce. They copy their genetic information and pass it onto their offspring. And for RNAs to start life, they needed to reproduce too. This is why scientists think that the RNA world took off when an RNA emerged that could make copies of itself. As it did, new self-copying RNAs emerged. Some were better at copying themselves than others. The RNAs competed against each other, and the most successful won out. Over millions of years, these RNAs multiplied and evolved to create an array of RNA machines. At some stage, DNA and proteins evolved. Proteins began to drive chemical reaction in cells, and DNA—which is more stable than RNA—took the job of storing genetic information.
Nucleotide-Building RNA
  

The first RNAs were likely made using free-floating nucleotides that emerged in a primordial soup of molecules.
Maintaining enough RNA building blocks (nucleotides) would have been a top priority in the RNA world. Scientists think nucleotide-building RNAs evolved on early Earth to provide nucleotides for building new RNAs.
Supplying the RNA world
According to the RNA world theory, the first RNAs were made using free-floating nucleotides that emerged in a primordial soup of molecules. They bonded together to make strands of RNA that weren’t very stable and degraded quickly. But some were more stable than others; these RNAs grew longer and bonded nucleotides more quickly. Eventually, RNA strands grew faster than they broke down—and this was RNA’s foot in the door. Over millions of years, these RNAs multiplied and evolved to create an array of RNA machines that are the basis of life as we know it today. But for RNA molecules to take hold, they would have needed an abundant supply of nucleotides. And scientists think nucleotide-building RNAs evolved to provide these RNA building blocks.


Prokaryotes:
            * Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms belonging to the domains Bacteria and Archaea.Bacteria and archaea are single-celled, while most eukaryotes are multicellular.
            * Prokaryotic cells are much smaller than eukaryotic cells, have no nucleus, and lack organelles.
            * All prokaryotic cells are encased by a cell wall. Many also have a capsule or slime layer made of polysaccharide.
            * Prokaryotes often have appendages (protrusions) on their surface. Flagella and some pili are used for locomotion, fimbriae help the cell stick to a surface, and sex pili are used for DNA exchange.
            * Most prokaryotic cells have a single circular chromosome. They may also have smaller pieces of circular DNA called plasmids.
The most fundamental differences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes relate to how their cells are set up. Specifically:
            * Eukaryotic cells have a nucleus, a membrane-bound chamber where DNA is stored, while prokaryotic cells don't. This is the feature that formally separates the two groups.
            * Eukaryotes usually have other membrane-bound organelles in addition to the nucleus, while prokaryotes don't.
            * Cells in general are small, but prokaryotic cells are really small. Typical prokaryotic cells range from 0.2-2μm in diameter, while typical eukaryotic cells range from 10-100μm in diameter.
Bacterial Diseases:
There are records about infectious diseases as far back as 3000 B.C.E. A number of significant pandemics caused by bacteria have been documented over several hundred years. Some of the most memorable pandemics led to the decline of cities and nations.
In the 21st century, infectious diseases remain among the leading causes of death worldwide, despite advances made in medical research and treatments in recent decades. A disease spreads when the pathogen that causes it is passed from one person to another. For a pathogen to cause disease, it must be able to reproduce in the host’s body and damage the host in some way.
The Plague of Athens
In 430 B.C.E., the Plague of Athens killed one-quarter of the Athenian troops that were fighting in the great Peloponnesian War and weakened Athens’ dominance and power. The plague impacted people living in overcrowded Athens as well as troops aboard ships that had to return to Athens. The source of the plague may have been identified recently when researchers from the University of Athens were able to use DNA from teeth recovered from a mass grave. The scientists identified nucleotide sequences from a pathogenic bacterium, Salmonella enterica serovar typhi, which causes typhoid fever. This disease is commonly seen in overcrowded areas and has caused epidemics throughout recorded history.
One of the most devastating pandemics was the Black Death (1346 to 1361) that is believed to have been another outbreak of bubonic plague caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. It is thought to have originated initially in China and spread along the Silk Road, a network of land and sea trade routes, to the Mediterranean region and Europe, carried by rat fleas living on black rats that were always present on ships. The Black Death reduced the world’s population from an estimated 450 million to about 350 to 375 million. Bubonic plague struck London hard again in the mid-1600s. In modern times, approximately 1,000 to 3,000 cases of plague arise globally each year. Although contracting bubonic plague before antibiotics meant almost certain death, the bacterium responds to several types of modern antibiotics; mortality rates from plague are now very low.
Migration of Diseases to New Populations
Over the centuries, Europeans tended to develop genetic immunity to endemic infectious diseases, but when European conquerors reached the western hemisphere, they brought with them disease-causing bacteria and viruses, which triggered epidemics that completely devastated populations of Native Americans who had no natural resistance to many European diseases. It has been estimated that up to 90 percent of Native Americans died from infectious diseases after the arrival of Europeans, making conquest of the New World a foregone conclusion.


Emerging and Re-emerging Diseases
The distribution of a particular disease is dynamic. Therefore, changes in the environment, the pathogen, or the host population can dramatically impact the spread of a disease. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), an emerging disease is one that has appeared in a population for the first time, or that may have existed previously, but is rapidly increasing in incidence or geographic range. This definition also includes re-emerging diseases that were previously under control. Approximately 75 percent of recently-emerging infectious diseases affecting humans are zoonotic diseases. Zoonoses, diseases that primarily infect animals and are transmitted to humans, are of both viral and bacterial origins. Brucellosis is an example of a prokaryotic zoonosis that is re-emerging in some regions. Necrotizing fasciitis (commonly known as flesh-eating bacteria) has been increasing in virulence for the last 80 years, for unknown reasons.
Some of the currently-emerging diseases are not actually new, but are diseases that were catastrophic in the past. They devastated populations, became dormant for a while, but have re-emerged, sometimes more virulent than before. Such was the case with bubonic plague. Other diseases, like tuberculosis, were never eradicated, but were under control in some regions of the world until re-emerging, mostly in urban centers with high concentrations of immunocompromised people. The WHO has identified certain diseases whose worldwide re-emergence should be monitored. Among these are two viral diseases (dengue fever and yellow fever) and three bacterial diseases (diphtheria, cholera, and bubonic plague). The war against infectious diseases has no foreseeable end.












13. Compartmentation of eukaryotic cells. Functions of some major cell organelles (nucleus, nucleolus, mitochondria) 
Cells work through the principle of compartmentalization. The metabolic reactions of catabolism (or breaking substances down) must be separated from the metabolic reactions of anabolism (or building new substances). Much like the rooms of your house, these reactions must take place in different physical locations that have the right environment.
An organism’s metabolism is formed from two separate components: catabolism and anabolism. Catabolic reactions break down large macromolecules into smaller molecules and release energy in the process. Anabolic reactions are using that energy to create larger biomolecules. To understand why cells need compartments, you need to understand why these two types of reactions cannot happen in the same physical space.
Let’s consider one, very simple reaction: the synthesis of a fatty acid. Fatty acids are created by a protein called Fatty Acid Synthase, which is located in the cytoplasm of cells. This massive protein complex is made of dozens of individual proteins that complete various reactions to synthesize a fatty acid molecule. Another protein, called the Mitochondrial Trifunctional Protein, breaks down fatty acids in the mitochondrial matrix. This protein cuts apart the fatty acid molecule into usable pieces. If you were to place both of these proteins into the same test tube with some fatty acids, nothing would get done because these proteins would constantly be undoing the work of the other protein. This is why compartmentalization is necessary.
Think about this… the idea of compartmentalization being efficient is not limited to cells. In fact, your entire body is compartmentalized. Each organ carries out a different function, allowing your body to be more efficient than if all your cells completed the same tasks. But, we also know that compartmentalization makes other aspects of human life more efficient. In a business, different departments are created to complete different tasks. This makes each department more efficient since they can focus on fewer tasks.
In eukaryotic cells, compartmentalization is created by the use of a series of internal membranes. These membranes surround the nucleus, create the folds of the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex, and surround organelles like chloroplasts and mitochondria. For example, let’s consider a mitochondrion.
A mitochondrion is an organelle surrounded by not one, but TWO membranes. The reactions taking place in the mitochondrion are breaking down substances to create ATP energy through catabolic reactions. These organelles can use glucose, amino acids, or fatty acids to create ATP. So, if these reactions were allowed to take place in the cytoplasm of the cell, the cell would not be able to complete the anabolic reactions it needs to combine glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids into large biological macromolecules like storage carbohydrates, proteins, or phospholipids.
You should also notice that many of these reactions happen right on the inner mitochondrial membrane. So, the membrane not only separates these reactions from the rest of the cell, but the many folds of the inner mitochondrial membrane produce a massive surface area for these reactions to take place! In mitochondria and chloroplasts, the space between the inner and outer membranes also makes a place where an ion gradient can be established, providing energy for ATP synthase to create new ATP molecules without affecting the pH or water balance of the rest of the cell.
These basic principles of compartmentalization – of separating important catabolic and anabolic reactions and creating a large surface area for reactions to occur – is true of all the membranes within a cell!
It is no coincidence that cells form specialized compartments. In fact, there are two mechanisms that create compartmentalization and keep the compartments of cells fully functional.  The first process is the anabolic processes of the metabolism that create and distribute new biological macromolecules. These molecules are tagged and distributed to specific parts of the cell.
For instance, a protein needed on the cell membrane will be created in the endoplasmic reticulum distributed to the cell membrane, while a protein needed in the cytosol will be created and distributed in the cytosol. Mitochondria and chloroplasts even have their own DNA and synthesize many of the substances they need. In this way, the anabolism produces and distributes molecules that create specialized compartments.
The second process that creates and maintains compartments with different enzymes and metabolites is the process of cellular division. Right before cell division starts to take place, all of the organelles within the cell are duplicated. Therefore, when the cell divides, each new cell has a full set of fully-functional compartments and organelles that already have the enzymes and structures needed to continue their important work within the cell.
These two processes ensure that every compartment in the cell is loaded up with the enzymes and metabolites that will create a specific environment for the important biological reactions that will be carried out in each compartment!
The last benefit of compartmentalization is that the reactions of catabolism and anabolism are physically separate, so they can operate simultaneously. There are many situations where this is beneficial.
The most obvious of these situations happens in a plant cell, where chloroplasts are rapidly creating glucose while the mitochondria are busy breaking glucose down. The chloroplasts are completing an anabolic process, whereas the mitochondria are engaging in a catabolic process. If these processes were not separated, the cell would become much less efficient. Being separated allows the chloroplasts to produce glucose as long as the sun is shining, while the mitochondria can slowly provide ATP for the cell from this glucose store – even at night when the sun is no longer shining!
But, this is just one example of how compartmentalization helps separate catabolic and anabolic processes. In fact, compartmentalization is important for each of the 4 types of biological macromolecules. Nucleic acids like mRNA can be continuously produced and exported by the nucleus while DNA and RNA from other organisms are digested down to individual nucleotides in a food vacuole. The cell can simultaneously create new phospholipids in the endoplasmic reticulum, while it recycles old ones in the cytoplasm. Likewise, the cell can simultaneously be destroying proteins while it makes new ones for different purposes or be creating storage carbohydrates while the mitochondria are using glucose to create ATP energy!
So, in essence, compartmentalization is incredibly important because it allows cells to carry out many reactions at the same time. This helps cells react and survive quickly changing environmental conditions and survive long enough to reproduce!
  



















































Functions:
Nucleus, in biology, a specialized structure occurring in most cells (except bacteria and blue-green algae) and separated from the rest of the cell by a double layer, the nuclear membrane. This membrane seems to be continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum (a membranous network) of the cell and has pores, which probably permit the entrance of large molecules. The nucleus controls and regulates the activities of the cell (e.g., growth and metabolism) and carries the genes, structures that contain the hereditary information. Nucleoli are small bodies often seen within the nucleus. The gel-like matrix in which the nuclear components are suspended is the nucleoplasm.


The nucleolus is a round body located inside the nucleus of a eukaryotic cell. It is not surrounded by a membrane but sits in the nucleus. The nucleolus makes ribosomal subunits from proteins and ribosomal RNA, also known as rRNA. It then sends the subunits out to the rest of the cell where they combine into complete ribosomes. Ribosomes make proteins; therefore, the nucleolus plays a vital role in making proteins in the cell. The nucleolus helps in protein synthesis and production of the ribosome in the cells. The nucleolus is located inside the nucleus of the eukaryotic cell. It is surrounded by a membrane inside the nucleus. The nucleolus contains DNA, RNA, and proteins. It is a ribosome factory. Cells from other species often have multiple nucleoli.


Mitochondria are often referred to as the powerhouses of the cell. They help turn the energy we take from food into energy that the cell can use. But, there is more to mitochondria than energy production. Present in nearly all types of human cell, mitochondria are vital to our survival. They generate the majority of our adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the energy currency of the cell. Mitochondria are also involved in other tasks, such as signaling between cells and cell death, otherwise known as apoptosis.




  

14. Compartmentation of eukaryotic cells. Functions of some major cell organelles (endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, lysosomes) 
Endoplasmic reticulum:
The endoplasmic reticulum can either be smooth or rough, and in general its function is to produce proteins for the rest of the cell to function. The rough endoplasmic reticulum has on it ribosomes, which are small, round organelles whose function it is to make those proteins. Sometimes, when those proteins are made improperly, the proteins stay within the endoplasmic reticulum. They're retained and the endoplasmic reticulum becomes engorged because it seems to be constipated, in a way, and the proteins don't get out where they're suppose to go. Then there's the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, which doesn't have those ribosomes on it. And that smooth endoplasmic reticulum produces other substances needed by the cell. So the endoplasmic reticulum is an organelle that's really a workhorse in producing proteins and substances needed by the rest of the cell. The endoplasmic reticulum serves many general functions, including the folding of protein molecules in sacs called cisternae and the transport of synthesized proteins in vesicles to the Golgi apparatus. Rough endoplasmic reticulum is also involved in protein synthesis


Golgi:
A Golgi body, also known as a Golgi apparatus, is a cell organelle that helps process and package proteins and lipid molecules, especially proteins destined to be exported from the cell. Named after its discoverer, Camillo Golgi, the Golgi body appears as a series of stacked membranes. The Golgi body is a portion of the cell that's made up of membranes, and there's different types of membranes. Some of them are tubules, and some of them are vesicles. The Golgi is located right near the nucleus. It's called a perinuclear body, and it's actually right near the endoplasmic reticulum as well. And when proteins come out of the endoplasmic reticulum, they go into the Golgi for further processing. For example, carbohydrates are put on some of the proteins, and then afterwards these glycoproteins--meaning they have carbohydrate as well as protein on them, these glycoproteins move out of the Golgi to the rest of the cell. And they do so inside other vesicles. Those vesicles are actually made from the Golgi network. In fact, one of the functions of the Golgi is to make new vesicles out of the existing membrane of the Golgi and put into those vesicles the glycoproteins and other substances that are made in the Golgi network. And then those vesicles, filled with the Golgi products, move to the rest of the cell, usually through the cell to the plasma membrane, which is their end destination.


Lysosomes:
A lysosome is a membrane-bound cell organelle that contains digestive enzymes. Lysosomes are involved with various cell processes. They break down excess or worn-out cell parts. They may be used to destroy invading viruses and bacteria. If the cell is damaged beyond repair, lysosomes can help it to self-destruct in a process called programmed cell death, or apoptosis. The lysosome is a specific type of organelle that's very acidic. So that means that it has to be protected from the rest of the inside of the cell. It's a compartment, then, that has a membrane around it that stores the digestive enzymes that require this acid, low-pH environment. Those enzymes are called hydrolytic enzymes, and they break down large molecules into small molecules. For example, large proteins into amino acids, or large carbohydrates into simple sugars, or large lipids into single fatty acids. And when they do that, they provide for the rest of the cell the nutrients that it needs to... So, for example, if you can't do that, it can't break down large molecules into small molecules. You'll have storage of those large molecules, and this is a disease. There's also another type of lysosome storage disease in which the small molecules that are produced from those large molecules can't get out of the lysosome. They're stored there because the transporters for moving these small molecules out are missing genetically. And finally, one other function of the lysosome is to ingest bacteria so that the bacteria can be destroyed. So the lysosomes also provide a function against infection, and the cell will often engorge a bacterium and put it into its lysosome for destruction. So here's an important organelle that has function against infection and function in a way in nutrition to break down large molecules into small molecules so that they can be reutilized.
15. The Mendelian laws of inheritance. Sex-linked inheritance. Inheritance of mitochondrial genes. 
endelian inheritance (or Mendelian genetics or Mendelism) is a set of primary tenets relating to the transmission of hereditary characteristics from parent organisms to their children; it underlies much of genetics. The tenets were initially derived from the work of Gregor Mendel published in 1865 and 1866, which was “re-discovered” in 1900; they were initially very controversial, but they soon became the core of classical genetics.
The laws of inheritance were derived by Gregor Mendel, a 19th century monk conducting hybridization experiments in garden peas (Pisum sativum). Between 1856 and 1863, he cultivated and tested some 28,000 pea plants. From these experiments, he deduced two generalizations that later became known as Mendel’s Laws of Heredity or Mendelian inheritance. He described these laws in a two part paper, “Experiments on Plant Hybridization”, which was published in 1866.
Mendel’s Laws
Mendel discovered that by crossing true-breeding white flower and true-breeding purple flower plants, the result was a hybrid offspring. Rather than being a mix of the two colors, the offspring was purple flowered. He then conceived the idea of heredity units, which he called “factors”, one of which is a recessive characteristic and the other dominant. Mendel said that factors, later called genes, normally occur in pairs in ordinary body cells, yet segregate during the formation of sex cells. Each member of the pair becomes part of the separate sex cell. The dominant gene, such as the purple flower in Mendel’s plants, will hide the recessive gene, the white flower. After Mendel self-fertilized the F1 generation and obtained an F2 generation with a 3:1 ratio, he correctly theorized that genes can be paired in three different ways for each trait: AA, aa, and Aa. The capital A represents the dominant factor while the lowercase a represents the recessive.
 image 

Mendel’s Pea Plants: In one of his experiments on inheritance patterns, Mendel crossed plants that were true-breeding for violet flower color with plants true-breeding for white flower color (the P generation). The resulting hybrids in the F1 generation all had violet flowers. In the F2 generation, approximately three-quarters of the plants had violet flowers, and one-quarter had white flowers.
Mendel stated that each individual has two alleles for each trait, one from each parent. Thus, he formed the “first rule”, the Law of Segregation, which states individuals possess two alleles and a parent passes only one allele to his/her offspring. One allele is given by the female parent and the other is given by the male parent. The two factors may or may not contain the same information. If the two alleles are identical, the individual is called homozygous for the trait. If the two alleles are different, the individual is called heterozygous. The presence of an allele does not promise that the trait will be expressed in the individual that possesses it. In heterozygous individuals, the only allele that is expressed is the dominant. The recessive allele is present, but its expression is hidden. The genotype of an individual is made up of the many alleles it possesses. An individual’s physical appearance, or phenotype, is determined by its alleles as well as by its environment.
Mendel also analyzed the pattern of inheritance of seven pairs of contrasting traits in the domestic pea plant. He did this by cross-breeding dihybrids; that is, plants that were heterozygous for the alleles controlling two different traits. Mendel then crossed these dihybrids. If it is inevitable that round seeds must always be yellow and wrinkled seeds must be green, then he would have expected that this would produce a typical monohybrid cross: 75 percent round-yellow; 25 percent wrinkled-green. But, in fact, his mating generated seeds that showed all possible combinations of the color and texture traits. He found 9/16 of the offspring were round-yellow, 3/16 were round-green, 3/16 were wrinkled-yellow, and 1/16 were wrinkled-green. Finding in every case that each of his seven traits was inherited independently of the others, he formed his “second rule”, the Law of Independent Assortment, which states the inheritance of one pair of factors (genes) is independent of the inheritance of the other pair. Today we know that this rule holds only if the genes are on separate chromosomes
Mendel’s law of dominance states that in a heterozygote, one trait will conceal the presence of another trait for the same characteristic. Rather than both alleles contributing to a phenotype, the dominant allele will be expressed exclusively. The recessive allele will remain “latent,” but will be transmitted to offspring by the same manner in which the dominant allele is transmitted. The recessive trait will only be expressed by offspring that have two copies of this allele; these offspring will breed true when self-crossed.
By definition, the terms dominant and recessive refer to the genotypic interaction of alleles in producing the phenotype of the heterozygote. The key concept is genetic: which of the two alleles present in the heterozygote is expressed, such that the organism is phenotypically identical to one of the two homozygotes. It is sometimes convenient to talk about the trait corresponding to the dominant allele as the dominant trait and the trait corresponding to the hidden allele as the recessive trait. However, this can easily lead to confusion in understanding the concept as phenotypic. For example, to say that “green peas” dominate “yellow peas” confuses inherited genotypes and expressed phenotypes. This will subsequently confuse discussion of the molecular basis of the phenotypic difference. Dominance is not inherent. One allele can be dominant to a second allele, recessive to a third allele, and codominant to a fourth. If a genetic trait is recessive, a person needs to inherit two copies of the gene for the trait to be expressed. Thus, both parents have to be carriers of a recessive trait in order for a child to express that trait.
Key terms
Term
	Meaning
	Sex chromosome
	One of two chromosomes that determine's an organisms biological sex
	Autosome
	Chromosome that is not a sex chromosome
	Sex-linked gene
	Gene that is located on one of the two sex chromosomes
	Carrier
	Heterozygous individual that inherited a recessive allele for a genetic disorder but does not display symptoms of that disorder
	Barr body
	A condensed region in the nucleus of a cell, consisting of an inactivated X chromosome
	Aneuploidy
	Condition of having too many or too few chromosomes
	Sex linkage
In humans, biological sex is determined by a pair of sex chromosomes: XX in females and XY in males. The other 44 chromosomes are autosomes.
Genes on either the X or Y chromosome are sex-linked traits. Genes found on the X chromosome can be found in either males or females, while genes found on the Y chromosome can only be found in males.
X-linked inheritance
There are many more X-linked traits than Y-linked traits because the Y chromosome is much shorter and fewer genes than the X chromosome.
 Diagram of the human X and Y chromosomes. The X is much larger than the Y. The X and Y have small regions of homology at both tips, which allow pairing of the chromosomes during meiosis. The SRY gene is found on the Y chromosome, near the tip, just below the region of homology with the X chromosome. 

X-linked genes have distinctive inheritance patterns because they are present in different numbers in females (XX) and males (XY).
Females have two X chromosomes, so she will have two copies of each X-linked gene, giving her the opportunity to be either homozygous or heterozygous for each sex-linked gene.
 This illustration shows a Punnett square analysis of fruit fly eye color, which is a sex-linked trait. A red-eyed male fruit fly with the genotype X^{w}Y is crossed with a white-eyed female fruit fly with the genotype X^{w}X^{w}. All of the female offspring acquire a dominant W allele from the father and a recessive w allele from the mother, and are therefore heterozygous dominant with red eye color. All of the male offspring acquire a recessive w allele from the mother and a Y chromosome from the father and are therefore hemizygous recessive with white eye color. 

This illustration shows a Punnett square analysis of fruit fly eye color, which is a sex-linked trait. A red-eyed male fruit fly with the genotype X^{w}Y is crossed with a white-eyed female fruit fly with the genotype X^{w}X^{w}. All of the female offspring acquire a dominant W allele from the father and a recessive w allele from the mother, and are therefore heterozygous dominant with red eye color. All of the male offspring acquire a recessive w allele from the mother and a Y chromosome from the father and are therefore hemizygous recessive with white eye color.
X-linked disorders
X-linked human genetic disorders are much more common in males than in females. Since males only have one X chromosome, and therefore one copy of any X-linked genes, whatever allele the male inherits for an X-linked gene will expressed.
An example of this is the blood-clotting disorder, hemophilia. Women who are heterozygous for hemophilia are carriers, and they usually don't display any symptoms themselves.
Sons of these women have a 50% chance of having hemophilia. Daughters have little chance of having hemophilia (unless the father also has it), and will instead have a 50% chance of being carriers.
 A diagram shows an unaffected father with a dominant allele and an unaffected carrier mother with an x-linked recessive allele. Four figures of offspring are shown representing the various resulting genetic combinations: unaffected son, unaffected daughter, affected son, and unaffected carrier daughter. 

X-inactivation
If males can survive with only one X chromosome, why doesn't it cause problems for women who have two X chromosomes?
As it turns out, for females, most of the genes in one of the X chromosomes is inactivated, forming a Barr body. This inactivation happens randomly during embryonic development.
Example:
A common example of X-inactivation is seen in cats. If a female cat is heterozygous for black and tan alleles of a coat color gene found on the X, two Xs (and thus, the two alleles of the coat color gene) will be inactivated at random in different cells during development.
 Image of a tortoiseshell cat, illustrating the X-inactivation processes responsible for the different patches of color on its coat. The cat has a mix of black and tan patches of fur, some small and some large. The cat's genotype is $\text X^O\text X^o$, where the large _O_ stands for organge and the small _o_ stands for black. 

* The orange patch is made up of cells in which the X  with the orange allele ($\text X^O$) is active, while the X with the black allele ($\text X^o$) is compacted into a Barr body.

* The black patch is made up of cells in which the X  with the black allele ($\text X^o$) is active, while the X with the orange allele ($\text X^O$) is compacted into a Barr body. 

Sex chromosome aneuploidy
Aneuploidy, or disorders of chromosome number, are generally caused by nondisjunction. This occurs when pairs of homologous chromosomes or sister chromatids fail to separate during cell division.
 Diagram depicting nondisjunction in meioisis I. One pair of homologous chromosomes fail to separate during meiosis I, leading to two abnormal cells as products of meiosis I: one cell with an extra chromosome and one with a missing chromosome. In meiosis II, the chromatid of the chromosomes are separated normally. This leads to production of two gametes with an extra chromosome (n+1 gametes) and two gametes with a missing chromosome (n-1 gametes). 

Diagram depicting nondisjunction in meioisis I. One pair of homologous chromosomes fail to separate during meiosis I, leading to two abnormal cells as products of meiosis I: one cell with an extra chromosome and one with a missing chromosome. In meiosis II, the chromatid of the chromosomes are separated normally. This leads to production of two gametes with an extra chromosome (n+1 gametes) and two gametes with a missing chromosome (n-1 gametes).
 Diagram depicting nondisjunction in meioisis II. Homologous chromosomes separate normally during meiosis I. However, the sister chromatids of one chromosome fail to separate during meiosis II, and instead move to the same pole of the cell and are segregated into the same gamete. In this case, the products of meiosis are two normal, euploid gametes (n), one gamete with an extra chromosome (n+1), and one gamete with a missing chromosome (n-1). 

Diagram depicting nondisjunction in meioisis II. Homologous chromosomes separate normally during meiosis I. However, the sister chromatids of one chromosome fail to separate during meiosis II, and instead move to the same pole of the cell and are segregated into the same gamete. In this case, the products of meiosis are two normal, euploid gametes (n), one gamete with an extra chromosome (n+1), and one gamete with a missing chromosome (n-1).
Individuals that have autosomal aneuploidy rarely survive to birth. However, due to the size of the X chromosome and because of X-inactivation, X chromosome aneuploidies tend to be much less harmful.
 Diagram showing sex chromosomes and Barr body formation in human individuals with different sex chromosome genotypes.

XX female: one active X, one Barr body.
XY male: one active X, one Y, no Barr body.
XXY male (Klinefelter syndrome): one active X, one Y, one Barr body.
XXX female (triple X syndrome): one active X, two Barr bodies. 

Diagram showing sex chromosomes and Barr body formation in human individuals with different sex chromosome genotypes.
XX female: one active X, one Barr body. XY male: one active X, one Y, no Barr body. XXY male (Klinefelter syndrome): one active X, one Y, one Barr body. XXX female (triple X syndrome): one active X, two Barr bodies.
In Klinefelter syndrome, males have one or more extra X chromosomes, leading to a genotype of XXY. (Or in rare cases, XXXY or XXXXY!) Affected men may be infertile or develop less dense body and facial hair than other men.
Women affected with Triple X syndrome have an XXX genotype. Women with Triple X syndrome have female sex characteristics and are fertile (able to have children).
Women with Turner syndrome lack part or all of one of their X chromosomes (leaving her with just one functional X). People with this disorder develop as females, but often have short stature and may experience infertility and learning difficulties.
Mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA
The DNA molecules found in mitochondria and chloroplasts are small and circular, much like the DNA of a typical bacterium. There are usually many copies of DNA in a single mitochondrion or chloroplasts.
 Diagram of a eukaryotic cell, showing the location of the mitochondria (floating in the cytosol, outside of and separate from the nucleus), and zooming in on the mitochondria to show the circular DNA molecules inside them. 

Diagram of a eukaryotic cell, showing the location of the mitochondria (floating in the cytosol, outside of and separate from the nucleus), and zooming in on the mitochondria to show the circular DNA molecules inside them.
Similarities between the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts and the DNA of bacteria are an important line of evidence supporting the endosymbiont theory, which suggests that mitochondria and chloroplasts originated as free-living prokaryotic cells.
How is non-nuclear DNA inherited?
Here are some ways that mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA differ from the DNA found in the nucleus:
            * High copy number. A mitochondrion or chloroplast has multiple copies of its DNA, and a typical cell has many mitochondria (and, in the case of a plant cell, chloroplasts). As a result, cells usually have many copies – often thousands – of mitochondrial and chloroplast DNA. [Are the copies identical within a single organelle?]
            * Random segregation. Mitochondria and chloroplasts (and the genes they carry) are randomly distributed to daughter cells during mitosis and meiosis. When the cell divides, the organelles that happen to be on opposite sides of the cleavage furrow or cell plate will end up in different daughter cells
            * Single-parent inheritance. Non-nuclear DNA is often inherited uniparentally, meaning that offspring get DNA only from the male or the female parent, not both. 
            * In humans, for example, children get mitochondrial DNA from their mother (but not their father).
Mitochondrial inheritance
Mitochondria, like chloroplasts, tend to be inherited from just one parent or the other (or at least, to be unequally inherited from the two parents). In the case of humans, it is the mother who contributes mitochondria to the zygote, or one-celled embryo, by way of the egg's cytoplasm. Sperm do contain mitochondria, but they are not usually inherited by the zygote. There has been a reported case of paternal inheritance of mitochondria in a human, but this is extremely rare.
 Both the sperm cell and the egg cell contain mitochondria and nuclear DNA. When they combine in fertilization, the resulting zygote will contain nuclear DNA from both parents, but it will contain mitochondria (and thus, mitochondrial DNA) from the egg cell only. 

Both the sperm cell and the egg cell contain mitochondria and nuclear DNA. When they combine in fertilization, the resulting zygote will contain nuclear DNA from both parents, but it will contain mitochondria (and thus, mitochondrial DNA) from the egg cell only.
Maternal inheritance of mitochondria in humans
Because mitochondria are inherited from a person's mother, they provide a way to trace matrilineal ancestry (line of descent through an unbroken chain of female ancestors).
To understand how mitochondria connect you to your mother's mother's foremothers, consider where your mitochondria came from. They were received from your mother, in the cytoplasm of the egg cell that gave rise to you. Where did your mother get her own mitochondria? From her mother, that is, your maternal grandmother.
If you keep asking this question, you can walk backward in time through your family tree, following your matrilineal ancestors and tracing the transmission route of your mitochondrial DNA.
 Nuclear DNA is inherited from all ancestors. Over three generations, pairs of ancestors have children, leading to a single present-day person who contains nuclear DNA from eight ancestors in the great-grandparent generation, four ancestors in the grandparent generation, and two ancestors in the parent generation.

Mitochondrial DNA is inherited from a single lineage. Over three generations, pairs of ancestors have children, leading to a single present-day person who contains nuclear DNA from eight ancestors in the great-grandparent generation, four ancestors in the grandparent generation, and two ancestors in the parent generation. Just one woman in each generation is the mitochondrial ancestor of the present-day person: his mother (parent generation), his mother's mother (grandparent generation), and his mother's mother's mother (great-grandparent generation). 

Nuclear DNA is inherited from all ancestors. Over three generations, pairs of ancestors have children, leading to a single present-day person who contains nuclear DNA from eight ancestors in the great-grandparent generation, four ancestors in the grandparent generation, and two ancestors in the parent generation.
Mitochondrial DNA is inherited from a single lineage. Over three generations, pairs of ancestors have children, leading to a single present-day person who contains nuclear DNA from eight ancestors in the great-grandparent generation, four ancestors in the grandparent generation, and two ancestors in the parent generation. Just one woman in each generation is the mitochondrial ancestor of the present-day person: his mother (parent generation), his mother's mother (grandparent generation), and his mother's mother's mother (great-grandparent generation).
Mitochondrial mutations and human disease
Mutations in mitochondrial DNA can lead to human genetic disorders. For example, large deletions in mitochondrial DNA cause a condition called Kearns-Sayre syndrome. These deletions keep the mitochondria from doing their job of extracting energy. Kearns-Sayre syndrome can cause symptoms such as weakness of the muscles, including those that control eyelid and eye movement, as well as degeneration of the retina and development of heart disease.
Genetic disorders caused by mitochondrial mutations are not transmitted from fathers to children, because mitochondria are provided only by the mother. Instead, they are transmitted from mothers to children in one of the following ways:
            * A person with a disease caused by a mitochondrial mutation may lack normal mitochondria (and have only abnormal, mutation-bearing ones). In this case, an affected mother will always pass on mutation-bearing mitochondria to her children.
            * A mitochondrial disorder may occur when a person has a mix of normal and abnormal mitochondria her body. In this case, normal and mutation-bearing mitochondria may go randomly into eggs during meiosis. Children who get a large proportion of mutant mitochondria may have severe disease, while those with few mutant mitochondria may have mild or no disease




16. Control of mitotic cell division, checkpoints in the cell cycle. The role of growth factors.
Both the initiation and inhibition of cell division are triggered by events external to the cell when it is about to begin the replication process. An event may be as simple as the death of a nearby cell or as sweeping as the release of growth-promoting hormones, such as human growth hormone (HGH). A lack of HGH can inhibit cell division, resulting in dwarfism, whereas too much HGH can result in gigantism. Crowding of cells can also inhibit cell division. Another factor that can initiate cell division is the size of the cell; as a cell grows, it becomes inefficient due to its decreasing surface-to-volume ratio. The solution to this problem is to divide.
Whatever the source of the message, the cell receives the signal, and a series of events within the cell allows it to proceed into interphase. Moving forward from this initiation point, every parameter required during each cell cycle phase must be met or the cycle cannot progress.


Regulation at Internal Checkpoints
It is essential that the daughter cells produced be exact duplicates of the parent cell. Mistakes in the duplication or distribution of the chromosomes lead to mutations that may be passed forward to every new cell produced from an abnormal cell. To prevent a compromised cell from continuing to divide, there are internal control mechanisms that operate at three main cell cycle checkpoints. A checkpoint is one of several points in the eukaryotic cell cycle at which the progression of a cell to the next stage in the cycle can be halted until conditions are favorable. These checkpoints occur near the end of G1, at the G2/M transition, and during metaphase.
 This illustration shows the three major checkpoints of the cell cycle: G_{1}, G_{2}, and M. 

The G1 Checkpoint
The G1 checkpoint determines whether all conditions are favorable for cell division to proceed. The G1 checkpoint, also called the restriction point (in yeast), is a point at which the cell irreversibly commits to the cell division process. External influences, such as growth factors, play a large role in carrying the cell past the G1 checkpoint. In addition to adequate reserves and cell size, there is a check for genomic DNA damage at the G1 checkpoint. A cell that does not meet all the requirements will not be allowed to progress into the S phase. The cell can halt the cycle and attempt to remedy the problematic condition, or the cell can advance into G0 and await further signals when conditions improve.
The G2 Checkpoint
The G2 checkpoint bars entry into the mitotic phase if certain conditions are not met. As at the G1 checkpoint, cell size and protein reserves are assessed. However, the most important role of the G2 checkpoint is to ensure that all of the chromosomes have been replicated and that the replicated DNA is not damaged. If the checkpoint mechanisms detect problems with the DNA, the cell cycle is halted, and the cell attempts to either complete DNA replication or repair the damaged DNA.


The M Checkpoint
The M checkpoint occurs near the end of the metaphase stage of karyokinesis. The M checkpoint is also known as the spindle checkpoint, because it determines whether all the sister chromatids are correctly attached to the spindle microtubules. Because the separation of the sister chromatids during anaphase is an irreversible step, the cycle will not proceed until the kinetochores of each pair of sister chromatids are firmly anchored to at least two spindle fibers arising from opposite poles of the cell.
Regulator Molecules of the Cell Cycle
In addition to the internally controlled checkpoints, there are two groups of intracellular molecules that regulate the cell cycle. These regulatory molecules either promote progress of the cell to the next phase (positive regulation) or halt the cycle (negative regulation). Regulator molecules may act individually, or they can influence the activity or production of other regulatory proteins. Therefore, the failure of a single regulator may have almost no effect on the cell cycle, especially if more than one mechanism controls the same event. Conversely, the effect of a deficient or non-functioning regulator can be wide-ranging and possibly fatal to the cell if multiple processes are affected.
Positive Regulation of the Cell Cycle
Two groups of proteins, called cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), are responsible for the progress of the cell through the various checkpoints. The levels of the four cyclin proteins fluctuate throughout the cell cycle in a predictable pattern. Increases in the concentration of cyclin proteins are triggered by both external and internal signals. After the cell moves to the next stage of the cell cycle, the cyclins that were active in the previous stage are degraded.
 This graph shows the concentrations of different cyclin proteins during various phases of the cell cycle. Cyclin D concentrations increase in G_{1} and decrease at the end of mitosis. Cyclin E levels rise during G_{1} and fall during S phase. Cyclin A levels rise during S phase and fall during mitosis. Cyclin B levels rise in S phase and fall during mitosis. 



 This illustration shows a cyclin protein binding to a Cdk. The cyclin/Cdk complex is activated when a kinase phosphorylates it. The cyclin/Cdk complex, in turn, phosphorylates other proteins, thus advancing the cell cycle. 



Cyclins regulate the cell cycle only when they are tightly bound to Cdks. To be fully active, the Cdk/cyclin complex must also be phosphorylated in specific locations. Like all kinases, Cdks are enzymes (kinases) that phosphorylate other proteins. Phosphorylation activates the protein by changing its shape. The proteins phosphorylated by Cdks are involved in advancing the cell to the next phase. The levels of Cdk proteins are relatively stable throughout the cell cycle; however, the concentrations of cyclin fluctuate and determine when Cdk/cyclin complexes form. The different cyclins and Cdks bind at specific points in the cell cycle and thus regulate different checkpoints.
Since the cyclic fluctuations of cyclin levels are based on the timing of the cell cycle and not on specific events, regulation of the cell cycle usually occurs by either the Cdk molecules alone or the Cdk/cyclin complexes. Without a specific concentration of fully activated cyclin/Cdk complexes, the cell cycle cannot proceed through the checkpoints.
Although the cyclins are the main regulatory molecules that determine the forward momentum of the cell cycle, there are several other mechanisms that fine-tune the progress of the cycle with negative, rather than positive, effects. These mechanisms essentially block the progression of the cell cycle until problematic conditions are resolved. Molecules that prevent the full activation of Cdks are called Cdk inhibitors. Many of these inhibitor molecules directly or indirectly monitor a particular cell cycle event. The block placed on Cdks by inhibitor molecules will not be removed until the specific event that the inhibitor monitors is completed.
Negative Regulation of the Cell Cycle
The second group of cell cycle regulatory molecules are negative regulators. Negative regulators halt the cell cycle. Remember that in positive regulation, active molecules cause the cycle to progress.
The best understood negative regulatory molecules are retinoblastoma protein (Rb), p53, and p21. Retinoblastoma proteins are a group of tumor-suppressor proteins common in many cells. The 53 and 21 designations refer to the functional molecular masses of the proteins (p) in kilodaltons. Much of what is known about cell cycle regulation comes from research conducted with cells that have lost regulatory control. All three of these regulatory proteins were discovered to be damaged or non-functional in cells that had begun to replicate uncontrollably (became cancerous). In each case, the main cause of the unchecked progress through the cell cycle was a faulty copy of the regulatory protein.
Rb, p53, and p21 act primarily at the G1 checkpoint. p53 is a multi-functional protein that has a major impact on the commitment of a cell to division because it acts when there is damaged DNA in cells that are undergoing the preparatory processes during G1. If damaged DNA is detected, p53 halts the cell cycle and recruits enzymes to repair the DNA. If the DNA cannot be repaired, p53 can trigger apoptosis, or cell suicide, to prevent the duplication of damaged chromosomes. As p53 levels rise, the production of p21 is triggered. p21 enforces the halt in the cycle dictated by p53 by binding to and inhibiting the activity of the Cdk/cyclin complexes. As a cell is exposed to more stress, higher levels of p53 and p21 accumulate, making it less likely that the cell will move into the S phase.
Rb exerts its regulatory influence on other positive regulator proteins. Chiefly, Rb monitors cell size. In the active, dephosphorylated state, Rb binds to proteins called transcription factors, most commonly, E2F. Transcription factors “turn on” specific genes, allowing the production of proteins encoded by that gene. When Rb is bound to E2F, production of proteins necessary for the G1/S transition is blocked. As the cell increases in size, Rb is slowly phosphorylated until it becomes inactivated. Rb releases E2F, which can now turn on the gene that produces the transition protein, and this particular block is removed. For the cell to move past each of the checkpoints, all positive regulators must be “turned on,” and all negative regulators must be “turned off.”
 This illustration shows the regulation of the cell cycle by the Rb protein. Unphosphorylated Rb binds the transcription factor E2F. E2F cannot bind the DNA, and transcription is blocked. Cell growth triggers the phosphorylation of Rb. Phosphorylated Rb releases E2F, which binds the DNA and turns on gene expression, thus advancing the cell cycle. 



Rb and other proteins that negatively regulate the cell cycle are sometimes called tumor suppressors.


Role of Growth Factors
Most growth factors regulate only certain types of cells and tissues.


Control of Cell Division is an active process involving both stimulation and inhibition (by antagonists). Mitosis, for example, will not occur in the presence of active inhibition and the absence of stimulation.


Growth factors regulate defined phases of the cell cycle. The two most important phases of the cell cycle are the transition from:


G0-----------> G1
and
G1-----------> S.
The transition from G0 to G1 is controlled by growth factors for:


            * skin cells (epidermal growth factor, EGF)
            * nerve cells (nerve growth factor, NGF)
            * connective tissue or mesenchymal cells (fibroblast growth factor, FGF)
            * thrombus-forming cells that line blood vessels (platelet- derived growth factor, PDGF)


An important growth factor regulating the transition from G1 to S is insulin-like growth factor, IGF-1.


The stimulating effect of these growth factors can be opposed by such antagonists as:


            * transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)
            * tumor necrosis factor (TNF).


Activation of a Growth Factor Receptor
A growth factor receptor is activated by binding to a specific growth at the cell's surface. The activated receptor, in turn, activates an intracellular protein (i.e., "substrate protein"). A receptor such as platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) can stimulate a number of substrates including Ras protein, the Src protein (the name is derived from the tumor, a sarcoma, in which it was first found), or phospholipase C, a signal transmitter.


AN EXAMPLE... RAS
PDGF binds to its receptor ----> Ras protein is activated ---- >
Ras triggers a short, time-limited signal ----> cell division is initiated.


Then, Ras is inactivated by GTPase activation protein (GAP).


If a gene mutation is present in either Ras or GAP, the time-limited aspect of the cell-stimulating signals may be lost...resulting in uncontrolled cell division which can lead to tumor formation.


Types of Growth Factors
There are Four Classes of Growth Factors:


Class I comprises growth factors interacting with specific receptors at the cell surface and includes epidermal growth factor (EGF), growth hormone (somatotropin), and platelet- derived growth factor (PDGF).
Class II are cell surface hormone receptors, frequently protein tyrosine kinases in the cytoplasmic domains of the receptor, as for EGF and PDGF.
Class III consists of a large group of intracellular signal transmitters, or transducers, belonging to different families, e.g., Ras proteins and protein kinases such as Src.
Class IV are nuclear transcription factors (proteins that bind to specific DNA segments such as promoters, resulting either in initiation of mRNA transcription or suppression of transcription). Initiators of DNA transcription include fos, myc, myb, and N-myc. Suppressors of cell division are such proteins as p53 and the retinoblastoma gene product.








17. Cellular responses to signals. Cell surface and cytoplasmic/nuclear receptors. G proteins, second messengers, protein kinase cascades.
Most cell signals are chemical in nature. For example, prokaryotic organisms have sensors that detect nutrients and help them navigate toward food sources. In multicellular organisms, growth factors, hormones, neurotransmitters, and extracellular matrix components are some of the many types of chemical signals cells use. These substances can exert their effects locally, or they might travel over long distances. For instance, neurotransmitters are a class of short-range signaling molecules that travel across the tiny spaces between adjacent neurons or between neurons and muscle cells. Other signaling molecules must move much farther to reach their targets. One example is follicle-stimulating hormone, which travels from the mammalian brain to the ovary, where it triggers egg release.
Some cells also respond to mechanical stimuli. For example, sensory cells in the skin respond to the pressure of touch, whereas similar cells in the ear react to the movement of sound waves. In addition, specialized cells in the human vascular system detect changes in blood pressure — information that the body uses to maintain a consistent cardiac load.
How Do Cells Recognize Signals?
Cells have proteins called receptors that bind to signaling molecules and initiate a physiological response. Different receptors are specific for different molecules. Dopamine receptors bind dopamine, insulin receptors bind insulin, nerve growth factor receptors bind nerve growth factor, and so on. In fact, there are hundreds of receptor types found in cells, and varying cell types have different populations of receptors. Receptors can also respond directly to light or pressure, which makes cells sensitive to events in the atmosphere.
Receptors are generally transmembrane proteins, which bind to signaling molecules outside the cell and subsequently transmit the signal through a sequence of molecular switches to internal signaling pathways. Membrane receptors fall into three major classes: G-protein-coupled receptors, ion channel receptors, and enzyme-linked receptors. The names of these receptor classes refer to the mechanism by which the receptors transform external signals into internal ones — via protein action, ion channel opening, or enzyme activation, respectively. Because membrane receptors interact with both extracellular signals and molecules within the cell, they permit signaling molecules to affect cell function without actually entering the cell. This is important because most signaling molecules are either too big or too charged to cross a cell's plasma membrane.
Not all receptors exist on the exterior of the cell. Some exist deep inside the cell, or even in the nucleus. These receptors typically bind to molecules that can pass through the plasma membrane, such as gases like nitrous oxide and steroid hormones like estrogen.
 A three-part schematic shows different views of the acetylcholine receptor in a horizontal plasma membrane. The extracellular environment is above the membrane, and the intracellular environment is below the membrane. The receptor is made up of five vertical green cylindrical structures that span the plasma membrane. The cylinders are arranged in a circle, and one of the cylinders is positioned at the front. The left side of the diagram shows the channel in an inactive, closed conformation with the front cylinder in place. The inactive, closed channel is also shown in the center, but the front cylinder has been removed to show that bulges in two of the cylinders block the pore. An active, open conformation of the channel is shown at the right with two round, blue acetylcholine molecules bound to the extracellular side of the channel, and smaller red, round ions moving through the open aqueous channel from the extracellular space to the inside of the cell. 

An example of ion channel activation:
An acetylcholine receptor (green) forms a gated ion channel in the plasma membrane. This receptor is a membrane protein with an aqueous pore, meaning it allows soluble materials to travel across the plasma membrane when open. When no external signal is present, the pore is closed (center). When acetylcholine molecules (blue) bind to the receptor, this triggers a conformational change that opens the aqueous pore and allows ions (red) to flow into the cell.


How Do Cells Respond to Signals?
Once a receptor protein receives a signal, it undergoes a conformational change, which in turn launches a series of biochemical reactions within the cell. These intracellular signaling pathways, also called signal transduction cascades, typically amplify the message, producing multiple intracellular signals for every one receptor that is bound.
Activation of receptors can trigger the synthesis of small molecules called second messengers, which initiate and coordinate intracellular signaling pathways. For example, cyclic AMP (cAMP) is a common second messenger involved in signal transduction cascades. (In fact, it was the first second messenger ever discovered.) cAMP is synthesized from ATP by the enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which resides in the cell membrane. The activation of adenylyl cyclase can result in the manufacture of hundreds or even thousands of cAMP molecules. These cAMP molecules activate the enzyme protein kinase A (PKA), which then phosphorylates multiple protein substrates by attaching phosphate groups to them. Each step in the cascade further amplifies the initial signal, and the phosphorylation reactions mediate both short- and long-term responses in the cell (Figure 2). How does cAMP stop signaling? It is degraded by the enzyme phosphodiesterase.
Other examples of second messengers include diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3), which are both produced by the enzyme phospholipase, also a membrane protein. IP3 causes the release of Ca2+ — yet another second messenger — from intracellular stores. Together, DAG and Ca2+ activate another enzyme called protein kinase C (PKC).
 A schematic of a section of a cell shows a simplified plasma membrane separating the external environment from the cell’s interior. A second set of two double membranes, lying side-by-side inside the cell, separates the nucleus from the surrounding cytoplasm. A gap between the ends of the two double membranes is a nuclear pore, which allows molecules to pass between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. The extracellular signaling molecule adrenaline is shown binding to an adrenergic receptor on the surface of the plasma membrane, activating a G-protein, and triggering the production of intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP) by adenylyl cyclase. The cAMP produced in the cell’s cytoplasm in turn activates the enzyme protein kinase A (PKA). PKA is shown transiting the nuclear pore and entering the nucleus where it phosphorylates a transcription factor in the nucleus. The phosphorylated transcription factor is then shown promoting the transcription of a region of DNA, which is labeled the activated target gene, to produce an mRNA molecule. 

An example of a signal transduction cascade involving cyclic AMP:
The binding of adrenaline to an adrenergic receptor initiates a cascade of reactions inside the cell. The signal transduction cascade begins when adenylyl cyclase, a membrane- bound enzyme, is activated by G-protein molecules associated with the adrenergic receptor. Adenylyl cyclase creates multiple cyclic AMP molecules, which fan out and activate protein kinases (PKA, in this example). Protein kinases can enter the nucleus and affect transcription.


How Do Signals Affect Cell Function?
Protein kinases such as PKA and PKC catalyze the transfer of phosphate groups from ATP molecules to protein molecules. Within proteins, the amino acids serine, threonine, and tyrosine are especially common sites for phosphorylation. These phosphorylation reactions control the activity of many enzymes involved in intracellular signaling pathways. Specifically, the addition of phosphate groups causes a conformational change in the enzymes, which can either activate or inhibit the enzyme activity. Then, when appropriate, protein phosphatases remove the phosphate groups from the enzymes, thereby reversing the effect on enzymatic activity.
Phosphorylation allows for intricate control of protein function. Phosphate groups can be added to multiple sites in a single protein, and a single protein may in turn be the substrate for multiple kinases and phosphatases.
At any one time, a cell is receiving and responding to numerous signals, and multiple signal transduction pathways are operating in its cytoplasm. Many points of intersection exist among these pathways. For instance, a single second messenger or protein kinase might play a role in more than one pathway. Through this network of signaling pathways, the cell is constantly integrating all the information it receives from its external environment.


Types of receptors:
Receptors come in many types, but they can be divided into two categories: intracellular receptors, which are found inside of the cell (in the cytoplasm or nucleus), and cell surface receptors, which are found in the plasma membrane.
Intracellular receptors
Intracellular receptors are receptor proteins found on the inside of the cell, typically in the cytoplasm or nucleus. In most cases, the ligands of intracellular receptors are small, hydrophobic (water-hating) molecules, since they must be able to cross the plasma membrane in order to reach their receptors. For example, the primary receptors for hydrophobic steroid hormones, such as the sex hormones estradiol (an estrogen) and testosterone, are intracellular.
When a hormone enters a cell and binds to its receptor, it causes the receptor to change shape, allowing the receptor-hormone complex to enter the nucleus (if it wasn’t there already) and regulate gene activity. Hormone binding exposes regions of the receptor that have DNA-binding activity, meaning they can attach to specific sequences of DNA. These sequences are found next to certain genes in the DNA of the cell, and when the receptor binds next to these genes, it alters their level of transcription.
 Diagram of a signaling pathway involving an intracellular receptor. The ligand crosses the plasma membrane and binds to the receptor in the cytoplasm. The receptor then moves to the nucleus, where it binds DNA to regulate transcription. Many signaling pathways, involving both intracellular and cell surface receptors, cause changes in the transcription of genes. However, intracellular receptors are unique because they cause these changes very directly, binding to the DNA and altering transcription themselves.
Cell-surface receptors:
Cell-surface receptors are membrane-anchored proteins that bind to ligands on the outside surface of the cell. In this type of signaling, the ligand does not need to cross the plasma membrane. So, many different kinds of molecules (including large, hydrophilic or "water-loving" ones) may act as ligands.
A typical cell-surface receptor has three different domains, or protein regions: a extracellular ("outside of cell") ligand-binding domain, a hydrophobic domain extending through the membrane, and an intracellular ("inside of cell") domain, which often transmits a signal. The size and structure of these regions can vary a lot depending on the type of receptor, and the hydrophobic region may consist of multiple stretches of amino acids that criss-cross the membrane.
There are many kinds of cell-surface receptors, but here we’ll look at three common types: ligand-gated ion channels, G protein-coupled receptors, and receptor tyrosine kinases.
Ligand-gated ion channels
Ligand-gated ion channels are ion channels that can open in response to the binding of a ligand. To form a channel, this type of cell-surface receptor has a membrane-spanning region with a hydrophilic (water-loving) channel through the middle of it. The channel lets ions to cross the membrane without having to touch the hydrophobic core of the phospholipid bilayer.
When a ligand binds to the extracellular region of the channel, the protein’s structure changes in such a way that ions of a particular type, such as Ca2+ or Cl−, can pass through. In some cases, the reverse is actually true: the channel is usually open, and ligand binding causes it to close. Changes in ion levels inside the cell can change the activity of other molecules, such as ion-binding enzymes and voltage-sensitive channels, to produce a response. Neurons, or nerve cells, have ligand-gated channels that are bound by neurotransmitters.
 Diagram of a ligand-gated ion channel. When the ligand binds to a closed ion channel in the plasma membrane, the ion channel opens and ions can pass through it, moving into or out of the cell (down their concentration gradient). G protein-coupled receptors
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are a large family of cell surface receptors that share a common structure and method of signaling. The members of the GPCR family all have seven different protein segments that cross the membrane, and they transmit signals inside the cell through a type of protein called a G protein (more details below).
GPCRs are diverse and bind many different types of ligands. One particularly interesting class of GPCRs is the odorant (scent) receptors. There are about 800 of them in humans, and each binds its own “scent molecule” – such as a particular chemical in perfume, or a certain compound released by rotting fish – and causes a signal to be sent to the brain, making us smell a smell!
When its ligand is not present, a G protein-coupled receptor waits at the plasma membrane in an inactive state. For at least some types of GPCRs, the inactive receptor is already docked to its signaling target, a G protein.
G proteins come in different types, but they all bind the nucleotide guanosine triphosphate (GTP), which they can break down (hydrolyze) to form GDP. A G protein attached to GTP is active, or “on,” while a G protein that’s bound to GDP is inactive, or “off.” The G proteins that associate with GPCRs are a type made up of three subunits, known as heterotrimeric G proteins. When they’re attached to an inactive receptor, they’re in the “off” form (bound to GDP).
 Diagram of the cycle of GPCR signaling.

1. When a signaling molecule binds to the GPCR, the G protein alpha subunit exchanges GDP for GTP.

2. The alpha subunit dissociates from the beta and gamma subunits and interacts with other molecules, ultimately triggering a cellular response. (The beta and gamma subunits may, in some cases, also participate in signaling.)

3. GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP, and the signaling molecule comes off of the receptor.

4. The alpha subunit comes back together with the receptor and the beta and gamma subunits.

The cycle can then repeat when a new ligand-binding event takes place. Diagram of the cycle of GPCR signaling.
            1. When a signaling molecule binds to the GPCR, the G protein alpha subunit exchanges GDP for GTP.
            2. The alpha subunit dissociates from the beta and gamma subunits and interacts with other molecules, ultimately triggering a cellular response. (The beta and gamma subunits may, in some cases, also participate in signaling.)
            3. GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP, and the signaling molecule comes off of the receptor.
            4. The alpha subunit comes back together with the receptor and the beta and gamma subunits.
The cycle can then repeat when a new ligand-binding event takes place.
Ligand binding, however, changes the picture: the GPCR is activated and causes the G protein to exchange GDP for GTP. The now-active G protein separates into two pieces (one called the α subunit, the other consisting of the β and γ subunits), which are freed from the GPCR. The subunits can interact with other proteins, triggering a signaling pathway that leads to a response.
Eventually, the α subunit will hydrolyze GTP back to GDP, at which point the G protein becomes inactive. The inactive G protein reassembles as a three-piece unit associated with a GPCR. Cell signaling using G protein-coupled receptors is a cycle, one that can repeat over and over in response to ligand binding.
G protein-coupled receptors play many different roles in the human body, and disruption of GPCR signaling can cause disease. 
Receptor tyrosine kinases
Enzyme-linked receptors are cell-surface receptors with intracellular domains that are associated with an enzyme. In some cases, the intracellular domain of the receptor actually is an enzyme that can catalyze a reaction. Other enzyme-linked receptors have an intracellular domain that interacts with an enzyme.
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are a class of enzyme-linked receptors found in humans and many other species. A kinase is just a name for an enzyme that transfers phosphate groups to a protein or other target, and a receptor tyrosine kinase transfers phosphate groups specifically to the amino acid tyrosine.
How does RTK signaling work? In a typical example, signaling molecules first bind to the extracellular domains of two nearby receptor tyrosine kinases. The two neighboring receptors then come together, or dimerize. The receptors then attach phosphates to tyrosines in each others' intracellular domains. The phosphorylated tyrosine can transmit the signal to other molecules in the cell.
 Diagram of receptor tyrosine kinases, showing ligand binding and receptor autophosphorylation.

When signaling molecules bind to two nearby receptors, the receptors dimerize (pair up).

The paired receptors phosphorylate one another on tyrosine residues in the intracellular domain (the portion of the protein inside of the cell.

The phosphorylated receptors can interact with other proteins in the cell to trigger signaling pathways leading to a response. Diagram of receptor tyrosine kinases, showing ligand binding and receptor autophosphorylation.
When signaling molecules bind to two nearby receptors, the receptors dimerize (pair up).
The paired receptors phosphorylate one another on tyrosine residues in the intracellular domain (the portion of the protein inside of the cell.
The phosphorylated receptors can interact with other proteins in the cell to trigger signaling pathways leading to a response.


In many cases, the phosphorylated receptors serve as a docking platform for other proteins that contain special types of binding domains. A variety of proteins contain these domains, and when one of these proteins binds, it can initiate a downstream signaling cascade that leads to a cellular response.
Receptor tyrosine kinases are crucial to many signaling processes in humans. For instance, they bind to growth factors, signaling molecules that promote cell division and survival. Growth factors include platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), which participates in wound healing, and nerve growth factor (NGF), which must be continually supplied to certain types of neurons to keep them alive. Because of their role in growth factor signaling, receptor tyrosine kinases are essential in the body, but their activity must be kept in balance: overactive growth factor receptors are associated with some types of cancers.
Types of ligands
Ligands, which are produced by signaling cells and interact with receptors in or on target cells, come in many different varieties. Some are proteins, others are hydrophobic molecules like steroids, and others yet are gases like nitric oxide. Here, we’ll look at some examples of different types of ligands.
Ligands that can enter the cell
Small, hydrophobic ligands can pass through the plasma membrane and bind to intracellular receptors in the nucleus or cytoplasm. In the human body, some of the most important ligands of this type are the steroid hormones.
Familiar steroid hormones include the female sex hormone estradiol, which is a type of estrogen, and the male sex hormone testosterone. Vitamin D, a molecule synthesized in the skin using energy from light, is another example of a steroid hormone. Because they are hydrophobic, these hormones don’t have trouble crossing the plasma membrane, but they must bind to carrier proteins in order to travel through the (watery) bloodstream.
 Chemical structures of estradiol and testosterone. Both have four fused hydrocarbon rings. The two hormones differ in the double bond patterns of the rings and in the functional groups attached to them. 

Chemical structures of estradiol and testosterone. Both have four fused hydrocarbon rings. The two hormones differ in the double bond patterns of the rings and in the functional groups attached to them.
Nitric oxide (NO) is a gas that acts as a ligand. Like steroid hormones, it can diffuse directly across the plasma membrane thanks to its small size. One of its key roles is to activate a signaling pathway in the smooth muscle surrounding blood vessels, one that makes the muscle relax and allows the blood vessels to expand (dilate). In fact, the drug nitroglycerin treats heart disease by triggering the release of NO, dilating vessels to restore blood flow to the heart.
NO has become better-known recently because the pathway that it affects is targeted by prescription medications for erectile dysfunction, such as Viagra.
Ligands that bind on the outside of the cell
Water-soluble ligands are polar or charged and cannot readily cross the plasma membrane. So, most water-soluble ligands bind to the extracellular domains of cell-surface receptors, staying on the outer surface of the cell.
Peptide (protein) ligands make up the largest and most diverse class of water-soluble ligands. For instance, growth factors, hormones such as insulin, and certain neurotransmitters fall into this category. Peptide ligands can range from just a few amino acids long, as in the pain-suppressing enkephalins, to a hundred or more amino acids in length.
 Enkephalin: a short peptide ligand of sequence Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met. 

Enkephalin: a short peptide ligand of sequence Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Met.
As mentioned above, some neurotransmitters are proteins. Many other neurotransmitters, however, are small, hydrophilic (water-loving) organic molecules. Some neurotransmitters are standard amino acids, such as glutamate and glycine, and others are modified or non-standard amino acids.




18. Endocrine, paracrine and autocrine effects. Hormones, neurohormones and their actions. Examples (hypothalamus, pituitary gland, adrenal gland, etc.). 
There are four categories of chemical signaling found in multicellular organisms: paracrine signaling, endocrine signaling, autocrine signaling, and direct signaling across gap junctions. The main difference between the different categories of signaling is the distance that the signal travels through the organism to reach the target cell. Not all cells are affected by the same signals.
 The illustration shows four forms of chemical signaling. In autocrine signaling, a cell targets itself. In signaling across a gap junction, a cell targets a cell connected via gap junctions. In paracrine signaling, a cell targets a nearby cell. In endocrine signaling, a cell targets a distant cell via the bloodstream 



Paracrine Signaling
 This illustration shows closely juxtaposed bulbous protrusions of presynaptic and postsynaptic cells. The presynaptic cell stores neurotransmitter in synaptic vesicles. When signaling occurs, the vesicles fuse with the cell membrane, thereby releasing the neutrotransmitter, which then binds to receptors on the postsynaptic cell. An enzyme on the surface of the postsynaptic cell destroys the neurotrasmitter, thereby terminating the signal. 

The distance between the presynaptic cell and the postsynaptic cell—called the synaptic gap—is very small and allows for rapid diffusion of the neurotransmitter. Enzymes in the synaptic cleft degrade some types of neurotransmitters to terminate the signal.


Signals that act locally between cells that are close together are called paracrine signals. Paracrine signals move by diffusion through the extracellular matrix. These types of signals usually elicit quick responses that last only a short amount of time. In order to keep the response localized, paracrine ligand molecules are normally quickly degraded by enzymes or removed by neighboring cells. Removing the signals will reestablish the concentration gradient for the signal, allowing them to quickly diffuse through the intracellular space if released again.
One example of paracrine signaling is the transfer of signals across synapses between nerve cells. A nerve cell consists of a cell body, several short, branched extensions called dendrites that receive stimuli, and a long extension called an axon, which transmits signals to other nerve cells or muscle cells. The junction between nerve cells where signal transmission occurs is called a synapse. A synaptic signal is a chemical signal that travels between nerve cells. Signals within the nerve cells are propagated by fast-moving electrical impulses. When these impulses reach the end of the axon, the signal continues on to a dendrite of the next cell by the release of chemical ligands called neurotransmitters by the presynaptic cell (the cell emitting the signal). The neurotransmitters are transported across the very small distances between nerve cells, which are called chemical synapses. The small distance between nerve cells allows the signal to travel quickly; this enables an immediate response, such as, Take your hand off the stove!
When the neurotransmitter binds the receptor on the surface of the postsynaptic cell, the electrochemical potential of the target cell changes, and the next electrical impulse is launched. The neurotransmitters that are released into the chemical synapse are degraded quickly or get reabsorbed by the presynaptic cell so that the recipient nerve cell can recover quickly and be prepared to respond rapidly to the next synaptic signal.
Endocrine Signaling
Signals from distant cells are called endocrine signals, and they originate from endocrine cells. (In the body, many endocrine cells are located in endocrine glands, such as the thyroid gland, the hypothalamus, and the pituitary gland.) These types of signals usually produce a slower response but have a longer-lasting effect. The ligands released in endocrine signaling are called hormones, signaling molecules that are produced in one part of the body but affect other body regions some distance away.
Hormones travel the large distances between endocrine cells and their target cells via the bloodstream, which is a relatively slow way to move throughout the body. Because of their form of transport, hormones get diluted and are present in low concentrations when they act on their target cells. This is different from paracrine signaling, in which local concentrations of ligands can be very high.
Autocrine Signaling
Autocrine signals are produced by signaling cells that can also bind to the ligand that is released. This means the signaling cell and the target cell can be the same or a similar cell (the prefix auto- means self, a reminder that the signaling cell sends a signal to itself). This type of signaling often occurs during the early development of an organism to ensure that cells develop into the correct tissues and take on the proper function. Autocrine signaling also regulates pain sensation and inflammatory responses. Further, if a cell is infected with a virus, the cell can signal itself to undergo programmed cell death, killing the virus in the process. In some cases, neighboring cells of the same type are also influenced by the released ligand. In embryological development, this process of stimulating a group of neighboring cells may help to direct the differentiation of identical cells into the same cell type, thus ensuring the proper developmental outcome.
Direct Signaling Across Gap Junctions
Gap junctions in animals and plasmodesmata in plants are connections between the plasma membranes of neighboring cells. These water-filled channels allow small signaling molecules, called intracellular mediators, to diffuse between the two cells. Small molecules, such as calcium ions (Ca2+), are able to move between cells, but large molecules like proteins and DNA cannot fit through the channels. The specificity of the channels ensures that the cells remain independent but can quickly and easily transmit signals. The transfer of signaling molecules communicates the current state of the cell that is directly next to the target cell; this allows a group of cells to coordinate their response to a signal that only one of them may have received. In plants, plasmodesmata are ubiquitous, making the entire plant into a giant communication network.
Hormones and Neurohormones:
Hormone, organic substance secreted by plants and animals that functions in the regulation of physiological activities and in maintaining homeostasis. Hormones carry out their functions by evoking responses from specific organs or tissues that are adapted to react to minute quantities of them. The classical view of hormones is that they are transmitted to their targets in the bloodstream after discharge from the glands that secrete them. This mode of discharge (directly into the bloodstream) is called endocrine secretion. The meaning of the term hormone has been extended beyond the original definition of a blood-borne secretion, however, to include similar regulatory substances that are distributed by diffusion across cell membranes instead of by a blood system.


The pituitary gland, or hypophysis, which dominates the vertebrate endocrine system, is formed of two distinct components. One is the neurohypophysis, which forms as a downgrowth of the floor of the brain and gives rise to the median eminence and the neural lobe; these structures are neurohemal organs. The other is the adenohypophysis, which develops as an upgrowth from the buccal cavity (mouth region) and usually includes two glandular portions, the pars distalis and the pars intermedia, which secrete a number of hormones. The hormones secreted by the adenohypophysis are protein or polypeptide in nature and vary in complexity; as a result, their chemical constitution has not always been as fully characterized as has that of structurally simpler molecules of some other endocrine secretions. Functional analysis of these hormones also is difficult, for the targets of certain hormones of the adenohypophysis, called tropic, or trophic, hormones, are other endocrine glands. The action of such tropic hormones can be understood only in the light of the mode of function of the endocrine glands they regulate.
Adenohypophysis
Growth hormone (somatotropin)
Growth hormone is a protein, the primary structure of which has been fully established for the human and bovine forms of the hormone. It is probably universally distributed in gnathostomes (vertebrates with jaws), in which it is essential for the maintenance of growth, but its presence in agnathans (jawless vertebrates) has not yet been established with certainty. The physical and chemical properties of growth hormone, which differ from species to species, are associated with marked differences in biological activity. Only part of the molecule, however, is actually responsible for its biological activity, for up to 25 percent of it can be lost without causing any decline in potency.


Growth is such a complex process that definition of the growth hormone’s mode of action is difficult. One of its known effects is an increase in the rate of protein synthesis, which is to be expected, since growth involves the deposition of new protein material. In addition, growth hormone affects the metabolism of certain ions (including sodium, potassium, and calcium), promotes the release of fats from fat stores, and influences carbohydrate metabolism in ways that tend to cause an increase in the level of glucose in the bloodstream. The last action creates a demand for an increased output of insulin (a hormone secreted by the pancreas), which acts to return the blood glucose level to normal. Prolonged treatment of dogs with growth hormone can overstrain the pancreatic tissue in which insulin is synthesized and bring about a diabetic condition, with insulin being formed in inadequate quantities. It is unlikely, however, that this is a factor in establishing diabetes mellitus in humans. Excess secretion of growth hormone does, however, have damaging effects in humans, for it produces overgrowth of the skeleton. If this occurs in youth, before the closure of the epiphyses (ends) of the long bones, it results in gigantism. If it occurs afterward, it causes acromegaly, in which the disturbance is more serious, with enlargement of the bones and soft tissues and consequent distortion of the skull.
Prolactin
Prolactin is a protein hormone that in female mammals initiates and maintains the secretion of milk, the mammary glands having been previously prepared for this function by the action of other hormones. Thus, prolactin is a gonadotropin, its target being an endocrine gland. Moreover, the molecular structures of prolactin and growth hormone are similar, which may explain why they show some overlap in biological properties. In particular, administration of prolactin promotes some growth in many terrestrial vertebrates. Human growth hormone has prolactin-like luteotropic properties.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH; also called corticotropin) is present in all jawed vertebrates but has not yet been decisively demonstrated in agnathans. It regulates the activity of part of the outer region (cortex) of the adrenal glands. In mammals its action on the adrenal cortex is limited to areas called the zona reticularis and zona fasciculata, in which important steroid hormones (e.g., glucocorticoids, such as cortisol and corticosterone) are formed; ACTH does not affect the synthesis of the mineralocorticoid hormone aldosterone, which takes place chiefly in the outer cortical region (zona glomerulosa). Evidence strongly suggests that the action of ACTH is mediated by a substance known as CAMP (cyclic 3′,5′-adenosine monophosphate), the rate of synthesis of which increases in adrenal tissue in the presence of ACTH; CAMP in turn promotes synthesis of enzymes necessary for the formation of cortisol and corticosterone. The relationship between ACTH and the adrenal cortex is an example of the negative feedback characteristic of endocrine systems; i.e., a decrease in the level of glucocorticoids circulating in the bloodstream evokes an increase in the secretion of ACTH, which, by stimulating the secretory activity of its target gland (the adrenal cortex), tends to restore to normal the level of glucocorticoids in the bloodstream. The release of ACTH can also be influenced by the level of circulating epinephrine (adrenaline), which is not surprising in view of the close functional relationship between the hormones of the adrenal cortex and medulla.
Thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone)
Thyrotropin (also called thyroid-stimulating hormone, or TSH) regulates the thyroid gland through a feedback relationship similar to that for ACTH; thyrotropin increases the secretion of the hormones from the thyroid gland and, if its action is prolonged, evokes increases in cell number (hyperplasia) and in size of the gland. One consequence of an overactive thyroid in humans is a bulging of the eyes (exophthalmos). 
Follicle-stimulating hormone
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) is a type of gonadotropin; it is concerned with the regulation of the activity of the gonads, or sex organs, which are endocrine glands as well as the sources of eggs and sperm. FSH stimulates development of the graafian follicle, a small vesicle containing an egg, in the ovary of the female mammal. In the male it promotes the development of the tubules of the testes and the differentiation of sperm.
Luteinizing hormone (interstitial-cell-stimulating hormone)
Luteinizing hormone (LH; also called interstitial-cell-stimulating hormone, or ICSH) is another gonadotropin, a glycoprotein with a molecular weight of 26,000 in humans. In the female mammal it promotes the transformation, following release of the egg (ovulation), of the graafian follicle into the corpus luteum, an endocrine gland. In the male LH promotes the development of the interstitial tissue (Leydig cells) of the testes and hence promotes secretion of the male sex hormone, testosterone. It may be associated with FSH in this function. 




Neurohormones:
A neurohormone refers to any of the hormones produced and released by specialized neurons called neuroendocrine cells. Neurohormones are secreted by these cells into the bloodstream for systemic effect. Some of them though act as neurotransmitters as well. As a neurotransmitter, they serve as a signal molecule from one neuron to another. Thus, some of them are not just for endocrine signaling (where they act as hormones) but also for autocrine or paracrine signaling.
Neurohormones include releasing hormones, neurohypophysial hormones, adrenomedullary hormones, and enteric neurohormones.
Releasing hormones and neurohypophysial hormones are hormones produced by the neuroendocrine cells in the hypothalamus. The hypothalamus is the region of the brain located between the thalamus and the midbrain. It is made up of several small nuclei. The releasing hormones, as opposed to neurohypophysial hormones, are released from the axon terminals that extend to the median eminence and reach to act on the anterior pituitary. Examples of releasing hormones are thyrotropin-releasing hormone, corticotropin-releasing hormone, growth hormone-releasing hormone, gonadotropin-releasing hormone, etc. The neurohypophysial hormones are hormones produced by the neuroendocrine cells in the hypothalamus with axon terminals extending to the neurohypophysis. These hormones are stored inside the Herring bodies in the axon terminals and are secreted into the circulation to reach and act on target cells. Examples of neurohypophysial hormones are oxytocin and vasopressin.
Adrenomedullary neurohormones are catecholamines secreted from the adrenal medulla by the neuroendocrine cells, chromaffin cells. Examples of adrenomedullary hormones are epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine.
Enteric neurohormones are neurohormones produced and released by enterochromaffin-like cells in the gastric glands of the stomach lining. These cells release histamine.


19. Structure and function of the mammalian heart. The cardiac cycle. Generation and conduction of action potentials.
The heart is a complex muscle that pumps blood through the three divisions of the circulatory system: the coronary (vessels that serve the heart), pulmonary (heart and lungs), and systemic (systems of the body). Coronary circulation intrinsic to the heart takes blood directly from the main artery (aorta) coming from the heart. For pulmonary and systemic circulation, the heart has to pump blood to the lungs or the rest of the body, respectively.
 image 

Circulatory System: The mammalian circulatory system is divided into three circuits: the systemic circuit, the pulmonary circuit, and the coronary circuit. Blood is pumped from veins of the systemic circuit into the right atrium of the heart, then into the right ventricle. Blood then enters the pulmonary circuit and is oxygenated by the lungs. From the pulmonary circuit, blood re-enters the heart through the left atrium. From the left ventricle, blood re-enters the systemic circuit through the aorta and is distributed to the rest of the body. The coronary circuit, which provides blood to the heart, is not shown.




The heart muscle is asymmetrical as a result of the distance blood must travel in the pulmonary and systemic circuits. Since the right side of the heart sends blood to the pulmonary circuit, it is smaller than the left side, which must send blood out to the whole body in the systemic circuit.
In humans, the heart is about the size of a clenched fist. It is divided into four chambers: two atria and two ventricles. There are one atrium and one ventricle on the right side and one atrium and one ventricle on the left side. The atria are the chambers that receive blood while the ventricles are the chambers that pump blood. The right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from the superior vena cava, which drains blood from the veins of the upper organs and arms. The right atrium also receives blood from the inferior vena cava, which drains blood from the veins of the lower organs and legs. In addition, the right atrium receives blood from the coronary sinus, which drains deoxygenated blood from the heart itself. This deoxygenated blood then passes to the right ventricle through the right atrioventricular valve (tricuspid valve), a flap of connective tissue that opens in only one direction to prevent the backflow of blood. After it is filled, the right ventricle pumps the blood through the pulmonary arteries to the lungs for re-oxygenation. After blood passes through the pulmonary arteries, the right semilunar valves close, preventing the blood from flowing backwards into the right ventricle. The left atrium then receives the oxygen-rich blood from the lungs via the pulmonary veins. The valve separating the chambers on the left side of the heart is called the bicuspid or mitral valve (left atrioventricular valve).The blood passes through the bicuspid valve to the left ventricle where it is pumped out through the aorta, the major artery of the body, taking oxygenated blood to the organs and muscles of the body. Once blood is pumped out of the left ventricle and into the aorta, the aortic semilunar valve (or aortic valve) closes, preventing blood from flowing backward into the left ventricle. This pattern of pumping is referred to as double circulation and is found in all mammals.
 image 



Layers of the Heart
The heart is composed of three layers: the epicardium, the myocardium, and the endocardium. The inner wall of the heart is lined by the endocardium. The myocardium consists of the heart muscle cells that make up the middle layer and the bulk of the heart wall. The outer layer of cells is called the epicardium, the second layer of which is a membranous layered structure (the pericardium) that surrounds and protects the heart; it allows enough room for vigorous pumping, but also keeps the heart in place, reducing friction between the heart and other structures.
Blood Vessels
The heart has its own blood vessels that supply the heart muscle with blood. The coronary arteries branch from the aorta, surrounding the outer surface of the heart like a crown. They diverge into capillaries where the heart muscle is supplied with oxygen before converging again into the coronary veins to take the deoxygenated blood back to the right atrium, where the blood will be re-oxygenated through the pulmonary circuit.
Atherosclerosis is the blockage of an artery by the buildup of fatty plaques. The heart muscle will die without a steady supply of blood; because of the narrow size of the coronary arteries and their function in serving the heart itself, atherosclerosis can be deadly in these arteries. The slowing of blood flow and subsequent oxygen deprivation can cause severe pain, known as angina. Complete blockage of the arteries will cause myocardial infarction—death of cardiac muscle tissue—which is commonly known as a heart attack.
Cardiac Cycle
 
 intracardiac blood flow during systole and diastole 

A single cycle of cardiac activity can be divided into two basic phases - diastole and systole. 
Diastole represents the period of time when the ventricles are relaxed (not contracting). Throughout most of this period, blood is passively flowing from the left atrium (LA) and right atrium (RA) into the left ventricle (LV) and right ventricle (RV), respectively. The blood flows through atrioventricular valves (mitral and tricuspid) that separate the atria from the ventricles. The RA receives venous blood from the body through the superior vena cava (SVC) and inferior vena cava (IVC). The LA receives oxygenated blood from lungs through four pulmonary veins that enter the LA. At the end of diastole, both atria contract, which propels an additional amount of blood into the ventricles.
Systole represents the time during which the left and right ventricles contract and eject blood into the aorta and pulmonary artery, respectively. During systole, the aortic and pulmonic valves open to permit ejection into the aorta and pulmonary artery. The atrioventricular valves are closed during systole, therefore no blood is entering the ventricles; however, blood continues to enter the atria through the vena cavae and pulmonary veins.
 Cardiac cycle 

The cardiac cycle diagram shown to the right depicts changes in aortic pressure (AP), left ventricular pressure (LVP), left atrial pressure (LAP), left ventricular volume (LV Vol), and heart sounds during a single cycle of cardiac contraction and relaxation. These changes are related in time to the electrocardiogram. 
Aortic pressure is measured by inserting a pressure-measuring catheter into the aorta from a peripheral artery, and the left ventricular pressure is obtained by placing a catheter inside the left ventricle and measuring changes in intraventricular pressure as the heart beats. Left atrial pressure is not usually measured directly, except in investigational procedures; however, left atrial pressure can be estimated by recording the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. Ventricular volume changes can be assessed in real time using echocardiography or radionuclide imaging, or by using a special volume conductance catheter placed within the ventricle.
To analyze systole and diastole in more detail, the cardiac cycle is usually divided into seven phases. The first phase begins with the P wave of the electrocardiogram, which represents atrial depolarization, and is the last phase of diastole. Phases 2-4 represent systole, and phases 5-7 represent early and mid-diastole. The last phase of the cardiac cycle ends with the appearance of the next P wave, which begins a new cycle.


Neurones communicate with each other via brief electrical signals known as action potentials.  They are brief changes in the voltage across the membrane due to the flow of certain ions into and out of the neurons. 
Generation of Action Potentials
During the resting state, the membrane potential arises because the membrane is predominantly permeable to K+. An action potential begins at the axon hillock as a result of depolarisation. During depolarisation voltage-gated sodium ion channels open due to an electrical stimulus. As the sodium ions rush back into the cell their positive charge, pushes potential inside the cell from negative to more positive.
If a threshold potential is reached, then an action potential is produced. Action potentials will only occur if a threshold is reached. Hence, they are described as “all-or-nothing“. Additionally, if the threshold is reached, then the maximum response will be elicited.
Once the cell has been depolarised the voltage-gated sodium ion channels begin to close. The raised positive charge inside the cell causes voltage-gated potassium channels to open, K+ ions now move down their electrochemical gradient out of the cell. As the K+ moves out of the cell, the membrane potential becomes more negative and starts to approach the resting potential.
Typically, repolarisation overshoots the resting membrane potential, making the membrane potential more negative. This is known as hyperpolarisation. It is important to note that the Na+/K+ ATPase is not involved in the repolarisation process following an action potential.
Every action potential is followed by a refractory period. This period can be further divided into:
            * the absolute refractory period which occurs once the sodium channels close after an AP. Sodium channels then enter an inactive state during which they cannot be reopened, regardless of the membrane potential.
and
            * the relative refractory period which occurs when sodium channels slowly come out of the inactivation. During this period the neurone can be excited with stimuli stronger than one normally needed to initial an AP. Early on in the relative refractory period, the strength of the stimulus required is very high. Gradually it becomes smaller throughout the relative refractory period as more sodium channels recover from the inactivation.
Action potentials are propagated along the axons of neurones via local currents. Local currents induce depolarisation of the adjacent axonal membrane and where this reaches a threshold, further action potentials are generated. The areas of the membrane that have recently depolarised will not depolarise again due to the refractory period – meaning that the action potential will only travel in one direction.
These local currents would eventually decrease in charge until a threshold is no longer reached. The distance that this would take depends on the membrane capacitance and resistance:
            * Membrane capacitance – the ability to store charge. The lower capacitance results in a greater distance before the threshold is no longer reached.
            * Membrane resistance – depends on the number of ion channels open. The lower the number of channels open, the greater membrane resistance is. A higher membrane resistance results in a greater distance before the threshold is no longer reached.


  



Myelinated Axons
In order to allow rapid conduction of electrical signals through a neurone and make them more energy-efficient certain neuronal axons are covered by a myelin sheath. The myelin sheath surrounds the axon to form an insulating layer. 
Along a myelinated axon, there are periodic gaps where there is no myelin and the axonal membrane is exposed. These gaps are called Nodes of Ranvier. In contrast to myelinated sections of the axon that lack voltage-gated ion channels, Nodes of Ranvier harbour a high density of ion channels. For this reason, an action potential can only occur at the nodes.
The myelin sheath speeds up the conduction by increasing the membrane resistance and reducing the membrane capacitance. Hence, the action potential is able to propagate along the neurone at a higher speed than would be possible in unmyelinated neurons. The electrical signals are rapidly conducted from one node to the next, where is causes depolarisation of the membrane. If depolarisation exceeds the threshold, it initiates another action potential which is conducted to the next node. In this manner, an action potential is rapidly conducted down a neurone. This is known as saltatory conduction.


Action potential: electrical stimulation created by a sequence of ion fluxes through specialized channels in the membrane (sarcolemma) of cardiomyocytes that leads to cardiac contraction.
Action potential in cardiomyocytes
The action potential in typical cardiomyocytes is composed of 5 phases (0-4), beginning and ending with phase 4.
Phase 4: The resting phase
            * The resting potential in a cardiomyocyte is −90 mV due to a constant outward leak of K+ through inward rectifier channels.
            * Na+ and Ca2+ channels are closed at resting TMP.
Phase 0: Depolarization
            * An action potential triggered in a neighbouring cardiomyocyte or pacemaker cell causes the TMP to rise above −90 mV.
            * Fast Na+ channels start to open one by one and Na+ leaks into the cell, further raising the TMP.
            * TMP approaches −70mV, the threshold potential in cardiomyocytes, i.e. the point at which enough fast Na+ channels have opened to generate a self-sustaining inward Na+ current.
            * The large Na+ current rapidly depolarizes the TMP to 0 mV and slightly above 0 mV for a transient period of time called the overshoot; fast Na+ channels close (recall that fast Na+ channels are time-dependent).
            * L-type (“long-opening”) Ca2+ channels open when the TMP is greater than −40 mV and cause a small but steady influx of Ca2+ down its concentration gradient.
Phase 1: Early repolarization
            * TMP is now slightly positive.
            * Some K+ channels open briefly and an outward flow of K+ returns the TMP to approximately 0 mV.
Phase 2: The plateau phase
            * L-type Ca2+ channels are still open and there is a small, constant inward current of Ca2+. This becomes significant in the excitation-contraction coupling process described below.
            * K+ leaks out down its concentration gradient through delayed rectifier K+ channels.
            * These two countercurrents are electrically balanced, and the TMP is maintained at a plateau just below 0 mV throughout phase 2.
Phase 3: Repolarization
            * Ca2+ channels are gradually inactivated.
            * Persistent outflow of K+, now exceeding Ca2+ inflow, brings TMP back towards resting potential of −90 mV to prepare the cell for a new cycle of depolarization.
            * Normal transmembrane ionic concentration gradients are restored by returning Na+ and Ca2+ ions to the extracellular environment, and K+ ions to the cell interior. The pumps involved include the sarcolemmal Na+-Ca2+ exchanger, Ca2+-ATPase and Na+-K+-ATPase.




  



20. Structure and function of the human respiratory system. Gas exchange in the alveoli. Transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood. 
Respiration is the life-sustaining process in which gases are exchanged between the body and the outside atmosphere. Specifically, oxygen moves from the outside air into the body; and water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other waste gases move from inside the body into the outside air. Respiration is carried out mainly by the respiratory system. It is important to note that respiration by the respiratory system is not the same process as cellular respiration that occurs inside cells, although the two processes are closely connected. Cellular respiration is the metabolic process in which cells obtain energy, usually by “burning” glucose in the presence of oxygen. When cellular respiration is aerobic, it uses oxygen and releases carbon dioxide as a waste product. Respiration by the respiratory system supplies the oxygen needed by cells for aerobic cellular respiration and removes the carbon dioxide produced by cells during cellular respiration.


Respiration by the respiratory system actually involves two subsidiary processes. One process is ventilation or breathing. This is the physical process of conducting air to and from the lungs. The other process is gas exchange. This is the biochemical process in which oxygen diffuses out of the air and into the blood while carbon dioxide and other waste gases diffuse out of the blood and into the air. All of the organs of the respiratory system are involved in breathing, but only the lungs are involved in gas exchange.
Respiratory Organs
The organs of the respiratory system form a continuous system of passages called the respiratory tract, through which air flows into and out of the body. The respiratory tract has two major divisions: the upper respiratory tract and the lower respiratory tract. In addition to these organs, certain muscles of the thorax (the body cavity that fills the chest) are also involved in respiration by enabling breathing. Most important is a large muscle called the diaphragm, which lies below the lungs and separates the thorax from the abdomen. Smaller muscles between the ribs also play a role in breathing. 
  conducting passages 

During breathing, inhaled air enters the body through the nose and passes through the pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, and then enters the lungs. Exhaled air travels from the lungs in the opposite direction.
Upper Respiratory Tract
All of the organs and other structures of the upper respiratory tract are involved in the conduction or the movement of air into and out of the body. Upper respiratory tract organs provide a route for air to move between the outside atmosphere and the lungs. They also clean, humidity, and warm the incoming air. However, no gas exchange occurs in these organs.
Nasal Cavity
The nasal cavity is a large, air-filled space in the skull above and behind the nose in the middle of the face. It is a continuation of the two nostrils. As inhaled air flows through the nasal cavity, it is warmed and humidified. Hairs in the nose help trap larger foreign particles in the air before they go deeper into the respiratory tract. In addition to its respiratory functions, the nasal cavity also contains chemoreceptors that are needed for the sense of smell and that contribute importantly to the sense of taste.
Pharynx
The pharynx is a tube-like structure that connects the nasal cavity and the back of the mouth to other structures lower in the throat, including the larynx. The pharynx has dual functions: both air and food (or other swallowed substances) pass through it, so it is part of both the respiratory and digestive systems. Air passes from the nasal cavity through the pharynx to the larynx (as well as in the opposite direction). Food passes from the mouth through the pharynx to the esophagus.
Larynx
The larynx connects the pharynx and trachea and helps to conduct air through the respiratory tract. The larynx is also called the voice box because it contains the vocal cords, which vibrate when air flows over them, thereby producing sound. Certain muscles in the larynx move the vocal cords apart to allow breathing. Other muscles in the larynx move the vocal cords together to allow the production of vocal sounds. The latter muscles also control the pitch of sounds and help control their volume.
 Larynx (top view) 

A very important function of the larynx is protecting the trachea from aspirated food. When swallowing occurs, the backward motion of the tongue forces a flap called the epiglottis to close over the entrance to the larynx. This prevents swallowed material from entering the larynx and moving deeper into the respiratory tract. If swallowed material does start to enter the larynx, it irritates the larynx and stimulates a strong cough reflex. This generally expels the material out of the larynx and into the throat.
Lower Respiratory Tract
 Lungs diagram detailed 

The trachea and other passages of the lower respiratory tract conduct air between the upper respiratory tract and the lungs. These passages form an inverted tree-like shape, with repeated branching as they move deeper into the lungs. All told, there are an astonishing 1,500 miles of airways conducting air through the human respiratory tract! It is only in the lungs, however, that gas exchange occurs between the air and the bloodstream.
Trachea
The trachea, or windpipe, is the widest passageway in the respiratory tract. It is about 2.5 cm (1 in.) wide and 10-15 cm (4-6 in.) long. It is formed by rings of cartilage, which make it relatively strong and resilient. The trachea connects the larynx to the lungs for the passage of air through the respiratory tract. The trachea branches at the bottom to form two bronchial tubes.
Bronchi and Bronchioles
There are two main bronchial tubes, or bronchi (singular, bronchus), called the right and left bronchi. The bronchi carry air between the trachea and lungs. Each bronchus branches into smaller, secondary bronchi; and secondary bronchi branch into still smaller tertiary bronchi. The smallest bronchi branch into very small tubules called bronchioles. The tiniest bronchioles end in alveolar ducts, which terminate in clusters of minuscule air sacs, called alveoli (singular, alveolus), in the lungs.
Lungs
 Lung structure normal 

The lungs are the largest organs of the respiratory tract. They are suspended within the pleural cavity of the thorax. These are called lobes, and they are separated from each other by connective tissues. The right lung is larger and contains three lobes. The left lung is smaller and contains only two lobes. The smaller left lung allows room for the heart, which is just left of the center of the chest.
Lung tissue consists mainly of alveoli. These tiny air sacs are the functional units of the lungs where gas exchange takes place. The two lungs may contain as many as 700 million alveoli, providing a huge total surface area for gas exchange to take place. In fact, alveoli in the two lungs provide as much surface area as half a tennis court! Each time you breathe in, the alveoli fill with air, making the lungs expand. Oxygen in the air inside the alveoli is absorbed by the blood in the mesh-like network of tiny capillaries that surrounds each alveolus. The blood in these capillaries also releases carbon dioxide into the air inside the alveoli. Each time you breathe out, air leaves the alveoli and rushes into the outside atmosphere, carrying waste gases with it.
The lungs receive blood from two major sources. They receive deoxygenated blood from the heart. This blood absorbs oxygen in the lungs and carries it back to the heart to be pumped to cells throughout the body. The lungs also receive oxygenated blood from the heart that provides oxygen to the cells of the lungs for cellular respiration.
Protecting the Respiratory System
  Pseudostratified Ciliated Columnar epithelium 

You may be able to survive for weeks without food and for days without water, but you can survive without oxygen for only a matter of minutes except under exceptional circumstances. Therefore, protecting the respiratory system is vital. That’s why making sure a patient has an open airway is the first step in treating many medical emergencies. Fortunately, the respiratory system is well protected by the ribcage of the skeletal system. However, the extensive surface area of the respiratory system is directly exposed to the outside world and all its potential dangers in inhaled air. Therefore, it should come as no surprise that the respiratory system has a variety of ways to protect itself from harmful substances such as dust and pathogens in the air.
The main way the respiratory system protects itself is called the mucociliary escalator. From the nose through the bronchi, the respiratory tract is covered in the epithelium that contains mucus-secreting goblet cells. The mucus traps particles and pathogens in the incoming air. The epithelium of the respiratory tract is also covered with tiny cell projections called cilia (singular, cilium). The cilia constantly move in a sweeping motion upward toward the throat, moving the mucus and trapped particles and pathogens away from the lungs and toward the outside of the body.
What happens to the material that moves up the mucociliary escalator to the throat? It is generally removed from the respiratory tract by clearing the throat or coughing. Coughing is a largely involuntary response of the respiratory system that occurs when nerves lining the airways are irritated. The response causes air to be expelled forcefully from the trachea, helping to remove mucus and any debris it contains (called phlegm) from the upper respiratory tract to the mouth. The phlegm may spit out (expectorated), or it may be swallowed and destroyed by stomach acids.
Sneezing is a similar involuntary response that occurs when nerves lining the nasal passage are irritated. It results in forceful expulsion of air from the mouth, which sprays millions of tiny droplets of mucus and other debris out of the mouth and into the air. This explains why it is so important to sneeze into a sleeve rather than the air to help prevent the transmission of respiratory pathogens.
 sneeze 

How the Respiratory System Works with Other Organ Systems
The amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood must be maintained within a limited range for the survival of the organism. Cells cannot survive for long without oxygen, and if there is too much carbon dioxide in the blood, the blood becomes dangerously acidic (pH is too low). Conversely, if there is too little carbon dioxide in the blood, the blood becomes too basic (pH is too high). The respiratory system works hand-in-hand with the nervous and cardiovascular systems to maintain homeostasis in blood gases and pH.
It is the level of carbon dioxide rather than the level of oxygen that is most closely monitored to maintain blood gas and pH homeostasis. The level of carbon dioxide in the blood is detected by cells in the brain, which speed up or slow down the rate of breathing through the autonomic nervous system as needed to bring the carbon dioxide level within the normal range. Faster breathing lowers the carbon dioxide level (and raises the oxygen level and pH); slower breathing has the opposite effects. In this way, the levels of carbon dioxide and oxygen, as well as pH, are maintained within normal limits.
The respiratory system also works closely with the cardiovascular system to maintain homeostasis. The respiratory system exchanges gases between the blood and the outside air, but it needs the cardiovascular system to carry them to and from body cells. Oxygen is absorbed by the blood in the lungs and then transported through a vast network of blood vessels to cells throughout the body where it is needed for aerobic cellular respiration. The same system absorbs carbon dioxide from cells and carries it to the respiratory system for removal from the body.
Gas Exchange in the Alveoli
External Respiration
External respiration is the formal term for gas exchange. It describes both the bulk flow of air into and out of the lungs and the transfer of oxygen and carbon dioxide into the bloodstream through diffusion. While the bulk flow of air from the external environment happens due to pressure changes in the lungs, the mechanisms of alveolar gas exchange are more complicated. The primary three components of external respiration are the surface area of the alveolar membrane, the partial pressure gradients of the gasses, and the matching of perfusion and ventilation.
Surface Area
The alveoli have a very high surface area to volume ratio that allows for efficient gas exchange. The alveoli are covered with a high density of capillaries that provide many sites for gas exchange.
The walls of the alveolar membrane are thin and covered with a fluid, extra-cellular matrix that provides a surface for gas molecules in the air of the lungs to diffuse into, from which they can then diffuse into the capillaries.
Partial Pressure Gradients
Partial pressure gradients (differences in partial pressure) allow the loading of oxygen into the bloodstream and the unloading of carbon dioxide out of the bloodstream. These two processes occur at the same time.
 This illustration shows gas exchange in the alveolus. The drawing shows the blood stream wrapped around aveolus, with oxygen being delivered by the blood to the aveolus and carbon dioxide from the aveolus as the blood flows through it. This is external respiration, a result of partial pressure gradients, alveolar surface area, and ventilation and perfusion matching. 



Oxygen has a partial pressure gradient of about 60 mmHg (100 mmHg in alveolar air and 40 mmHg in deoxygenated blood ) and diffuses rapidly from the alveolar air into the capillary.
Equilibrium between the alveolar air and capillaries is reached quickly, within the first third of the length of the capillary within a third of a second. The partial pressure of oxygen in the oxygenated blood of the capillary after oxygen loading is about 100 mmHg.
The process is similar in carbon dioxide. The partial pressure gradient for carbon dioxide is much smaller compared to oxygen, being only 5 mmHg (45 mmHg in deoxygenated blood and 40 mmHg in alveolar air).
Based on Henry’s law, the greater solubility of carbon dioxide in blood compared to oxygen means that diffusion will still occur very rapidly despite the lower partial pressure gradient. Equilibrium between the alveolar air and the capillaries for carbon dioxide is reached within the first half of the length of the capillaries within half a second. The partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood leaving the capillaries is 40 mmHg.
Ventilation and Perfusion Matching
The exchange of gas and blood supply to the lungs must be balanced in order to facilitate efficient external respiration. While a severe ventilation–perfusion mismatch indicates severe lung disease, minor imbalances can be corrected by maintaining air flow that is proportional to capillary blood flow, which maintains the balance of ventilation and perfusion.
Perfusion in the capillaries adjusts to changes in PAO2. Constriction in the airways (such as from the bronchospasms in an asthma attack) lead to decreased PAO2 because the flow of air into the lungs is slowed.
In response, the arteries being supplied by the constricted airway undergo vasocontriction, reducing the flow of blood into those alveoli so that the perfusion doesn’t become much greater relative to the decreased ventilation (a type of ventilation–perfusion mismatch called a shunt).
Alternatively, breathing in higher concentrations of oxygen from an oxygen tank will cause vasodilation and increased blood perfusion in the capillaries.
Ventilation adjusts from changes in PACO2. When airflow becomes higher relative to perfusion, PACO2 decreases, so the bronchioles will constrict in order to maintain to the balance between airflow (ventilation) and perfusion. When airflow is reduced, PACO2 increases, so the bronchioles will dilate in order to maintain the balance.


Internal respiration refers to two distinct processes. The first is the exchange of gasses between the bloodstream and the tissues. The second is the process of cellular respiration, from which cells utilize oxygen to perform basic metabolic functions.
Gas Exchange with Tissues
Gas exchange occurs in the alveoli  so that oxygen is loaded into the bloodstream and carbon dioxide is unloaded from the bloodstream. Afterwards, oxygen is brought to the left side of the heart via the pulmonary vein, which pumps it into systemic circulation.
Red blood cells carry the oxygen into the capillaries of the tissues of the body. Oxygen diffuses into the cells of the tissues, while carbon dioxide diffuses out of the cells of the tissues and into the bloodstream.
The factors that influence tissue gas exchange are similar to the factors of alveolar gas exchange, and include partial pressure gradients between the blood and the tissues, the blood perfusion of those tissues, and the surface areas of those tissues. Each of those factors generally increase gas exchange as those factors are increased (i.e., more oxygen diffusion in tissues with more blood perfusion).
Regarding the partial pressure gradients in systemic capillaries, they have a PaO2 of 100mmHg and a PaCO2 of 40mmHG within the capillary and a PaO2 of 40 mmHg and PaCO2 of 45 mmHg inside issue cells, which allows gas exchange to occur.
Cellular Respiration
Cellular respiration is the metabolic process by which an organism obtains energy through the reaction of oxygen with glucose to produce water, carbon dioxide and ATP, which is the functional source of energy for the cell. The oxygen supply for cellular respiration comes from the external respiration of the respiratory system.


Cellular respiration includes three major steps, and occurs mainly in the cytoplasm of the cell and within the mitochondria of the cell. The net formula for cellular respiration is:
            1. Glycolysis: The breakdown of glucose into pyruvate, ATP, H2O, and heat.
            2. Krebs Cycle: Produces NADH from pyruvate.
            3. Oxidative Phosphorylation: Produces ATP from NADH, oxygen, and H+. The oxygen plays the role of electron receptor in an electron transport chain to produce ATP.
The net formula for cellular respiration is:
Glucose+6 Oxygen→6 Carbon Dioxide+6 Water+38 ATP
The carbon dioxide waste is the result of the carbon from glucose (C6H12O6) being broken down to produce the pyruvate and NADH intermediates needed to produce ATP at the end of respiration. The energy stored in ATP can then be used to drive processes that require energy, including biosynthesis, locomotion, or transportation of molecules across cell membranes.
Cellular respiration can occur anaerobically without oxygen, such as through lactic acid fermentation. Human cells may use lactic acid fermentation in muscle tissue during strenuous exercise when there isn’t enough oxygen to power the tissues. This process is very inefficient compared to aerobic respiration, as without oxidative phosphorylation, the cell cannot produce nearly as much ATP (2 ATP compared to 38 during cellular respiration).
Hemoglobin
About 98.5% of the oxygen in a sample of arterial blood in a healthy human breathing air at sea-level pressure is bound to the hemoglobin in blood (Hgb). Hemoglobin is a protein found in red blood cells (also called erythrocytes).
There are roughly 270 million hemoglobin molecules in a single red blood cell, and each contains 4 heme groups. The function of Hgb is to provide a binding site for oxygen to carry oxygen throughout the bloodstream to the  systemic tissues for cellular respiration.
 This is a diagram of the molecular structure of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is the iron-containing, oxygen-transport metalloprotein in the red blood cells of all vertebrates. 

Hemoglobin: Hemoglobin is the iron-containing, oxygen-transport metalloprotein in the red blood cells of all vertebrates.
About 1.5% of oxygen is physically dissolved in the other blood liquids and not connected to Hgb. It has an oxygen binding capacity between 1.36 and 1.37 ml O2 per gram Hgb.
Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve
The percentage of oxygen that is saturated in the hemoglobin of blood is generally represented by a curve that shows the relationship between PaO2 and O2 saturation. Saturation of O2 in hemoglobin is an indicator for how much O2 is able to reach the tissues of the body.
Higher PaO2 means higher saturation of oxygen in blood. Under normal conditions the PaO2 in systemic blood is equal to 50%, about 26.6 mmHg,; this is called the P50.
The curve starts to plateau at PaO2 higher than 60 mmHG, meaning that increases in PaO2 after that point won’t significantly increase saturation. This also means that the approximate carrying capacity for oxygen in hemoglobin has been reached and excess oxygen won’t go into hemoglobin.
The carrying capacity can be increased if more hemoglobin is added to the system, such as through greater red blood cell generation in high altitude, or from blood transfusions. The lower areas of the curve show saturation when oxygen is unloaded into the tissues.
 This is a graph of the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve. The oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve plots the percent hemoglobin saturation (y-axis) against the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood (x-axis). The graph shows three colored curves: the blue curve is the standard curve, while the red and green curves are right and leftward shifts respectively. 

The oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve: The oxygen–hemoglobin dissociation curve plots the percent hemoglobin saturation (y-axis) against the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood (PO2). The blue curve is standard curve, while the red and green curves are right and leftward shifts respectively.
The oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve can shift in response to a variety of factors. A change in the P50 of the curve is a sign that the dissociation curve as a whole has shifted. Shifts indicate a change in affinity for oxygen’s binding to hemoglobin, which changes the ability of oxygen to bind to hemoglobin and stay bound to it (i.e., not be released from it).
Rightward shifts indicate a decreased affinity for the binding of hemoglobin, so that less oxygen binds to hemoglobin, and more oxygen is unloaded from it into the tissues. The curve shifts right during decreased blood pH (called the Bohr effect), increased temperature, and during exercise among other things.
Anemia (a disorder marked by a decreased red blood cell count and less hemoglobin) also causes a rightward shift, but also changes the shape of the curve so that it moves downward as well as a result of the reduced levels of hemoglobin.
Leftward shifts indicate an increased affinity for the binding of hemoglobin, so that more oxygen binds to hemoglobin, but less oxygen is unloaded from it into the tissues. Causes of leftward shifts include increased blood pH, decreased temperature, and carbon monoxide exposure. Carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin in place of oxygen, so that less oxygen reaches the tissues; this can be fatal if severe enough.
Carbon Dioxide Transport
Carbon dioxide is the product of cellular respiration, and is transported from the cells of tissues in the body to the alveoli of the lungs through the bloodstream. Carbon dioxide is carried in the blood through three different ways.
Dissolved in the Plasma
About 5% of carbon dioxide is transported in the plasma of the blood as dissolved CO2 molecules that aren’t bound to anything else. Carbon dioxide has a much higher solubility than oxygen, which explains why a relatively greater amount of carbon dioxide is dissolved in the plasma compared to oxygen.
Bound to Hemoglobin
 This is a color picture of the structure of hemoglobin. It depicts hemoglobin as a tetramer of alpha (red) and beta (blue) subunits with iron-containing heme groups (green). 

Structure of human hemoglobin: Hemoglobin is a tetramer of alpha (red) and beta (blue) subunits with iron containing heme groups (green).
While oxygen binds to the iron content in the heme of hemoglobin, carbon dioxide can bind to the amino acid chains on hemoglobin. When carbon dioxide clings to hemoglobin it forms carbanimohemoglobin.
About 10% of carbon dioxide in the human body is transported this way. Carbanimohemoglobin gives red blood cells a bluish color, which is one of the reasons why the veins that carry deoxygenated blood appear to be blue.
A property of hemoglobin called the Haldane effect states that deoxygenated blood has an increased capacity to carry carbon dioxide, while oxygenated blood has a decreased capacity to carry carbon dioxide.
This property means that hemoglobin will primarily carry oxygen in systemic circulation until it unloads that oxygen and is able to carry a relatively higher amount of carbon dioxide. This is due to deoxygenated blood’s increased capacity to carry carbon dioxide, and from the carbon dioxide loaded from the tissues during tissue gas exchange.
Bicarbonate Ions
The majority (85%) of carbon dioxide travels in the blood stream as bicarbonate ions. The reaction that describes the formation of bicarbonate ions in the blood is:
CO2 + H2O → H2CO3 → H+ + HCO3–
This means that carbon dioxide reacts with water to form carbonic acid, which dissociates in solution to form hydrogen ions and bicarbonate ions.
The main implication of this process is that the pH of blood becomes a way of determining the amount of carbon dioxide in blood. This is because if carbon dioxide increases in the body, it will manifest as increased concentrations of bicarbonate and increased concentrations of hydrogen ions that reduce blood pH and make the blood more acidic.
Conversely, if carbon dioxide levels are reduced, there will be less bicarbonate and less hydrogen ions dissolved in the blood, so pH will increase and blood will become more basic. Bicarbonate ions act as a buffer for the pH of blood so that blood pH will be neutral as long as bicarbonate and hydrogen ions are balanced.
This connection explains how ventilation rate and blood chemistry are related, as hyperventilation will cause alkalosis, and hypoventilation will cause acidosis, due to the changes in carbon dioxide levels that they cause.
Bicarbonate is also carried in the fluids of tissues besides the blood vessels, especially in the duodenum and intestine, so problems in those organs can cause a respiratory system response.
Transport to the Alveoli
After carbon dioxide travels through the bloodstream to the capillaries covering the alveoli of the lungs through any of the 3 methods listed above, it must return to dissolved carbon dioxide form in order to diffuse across the capillary into the alveolus.  Dissolved carbon dioxide is already able to diffuse into the alveolus, while hemoglobin-bound carbon dioxide is unloaded into the plasma.
For carbon dioxide stored in bicarbonate, it undergoes a reaction reversal. Bicarbonate ions dissolved in the plasma enter the red blood cells by diffusing across a chloride ion gradient (replacing chloride inside the cell), and combining with hydrogen to form carbonic acid.
Next, the action of carbonic anhydrase breaks carbonic acid down into carbon dioxide in water, which leaves the cell by diffusion. The dissolved carbon dioxide is then able to diffuse into the alveolus.




21. Structure and function of the human digestive system. The major enzymes of carbohydrate, protein and lipid digestion. Absorption of nutrients. 
The function of the digestive system is to break down the foods you eat, release their nutrients, and absorb those nutrients into the body. Although the small intestine is the workhorse of the system, where the majority of digestion occurs, and where most of the released nutrients are absorbed into the blood or lymph, each of the digestive system organs makes a vital contribution to this process.
 This diagram shows the digestive system of a human being, with the major organs labeled. 



As is the case with all body systems, the digestive system does not work in isolation; it functions cooperatively with the other systems of the body. Consider for example, the interrelationship between the digestive and cardiovascular systems. Arteries supply the digestive organs with oxygen and processed nutrients, and veins drain the digestive tract. These intestinal veins, constituting the hepatic portal system, are unique; they do not return blood directly to the heart. Rather, this blood is diverted to the liver where its nutrients are off-loaded for processing before blood completes its circuit back to the heart. At the same time, the digestive system provides nutrients to the heart muscle and vascular tissue to support their functioning. The interrelationship of the digestive and endocrine systems is also critical. Hormones secreted by several endocrine glands, as well as endocrine cells of the pancreas, the stomach, and the small intestine, contribute to the control of digestion and nutrient metabolism. In turn, the digestive system provides the nutrients to fuel endocrine function. 
Table 1. Contribution of Other Body Systems to the Digestive System
	Body system
	Benefits received by the digestive system
	Cardiovascular
	Blood supplies digestive organs with oxygen and processed nutrients
	Endocrine
	Endocrine hormones help regulate secretion in digestive glands and accessory organs
	Integumentary
	Skin helps protect digestive organs and synthesizes vitamin D for calcium absorption
	Lymphatic
	Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue and other lymphatic tissue defend against entry of pathogens; lacteals absorb lipids; and lymphatic vessels transport lipids to bloodstream
	Muscular
	Skeletal muscles support and protect abdominal organs
	Nervous
	Sensory and motor neurons help regulate secretions and muscle contractions in the digestive tract
	Respiratory
	Respiratory organs provide oxygen and remove carbon dioxide
	Skeletal
	Bones help protect and support digestive organs
	Urinary
	Kidneys convert vitamin D into its active form, allowing calcium absorption in the small intestine
	Digestive System Organs
The easiest way to understand the digestive system is to divide its organs into two main categories. The first group is the organs that make up the alimentary canal. Accessory digestive organs comprise the second group and are critical for orchestrating the breakdown of food and the assimilation of its nutrients into the body. Accessory digestive organs, despite their name, are critical to the function of the digestive system.
Alimentary Canal Organs
Also called the gastrointestinal (GI) tract or gut, the alimentary canal (aliment- = “to nourish”) is a one-way tube about 7.62 meters (25 feet) in length during life and closer to 10.67 meters (35 feet) in length when measured after death, once smooth muscle tone is lost. The main function of the organs of the alimentary canal is to nourish the body. This tube begins at the mouth and terminates at the anus. Between those two points, the canal is modified as the pharynx, esophagus, stomach, and small and large intestines to fit the functional needs of the body. Both the mouth and anus are open to the external environment; thus, food and wastes within the alimentary canal are technically considered to be outside the body. Only through the process of absorption do the nutrients in food enter into and nourish the body’s “inner space.”
Accessory Structures
Each accessory digestive organ aids in the breakdown of food. Within the mouth, the teeth and tongue begin mechanical digestion, whereas the salivary glands begin chemical digestion. Once food products enter the small intestine, the gallbladder, liver, and pancreas release secretions—such as bile and enzymes—essential for digestion to continue. Together, these are called accessory organs because they sprout from the lining cells of the developing gut (mucosa) and augment its function; indeed, you could not live without their vital contributions, and many significant diseases result from their malfunction. Even after development is complete, they maintain a connection to the gut by way of ducts.
Histology of the Alimentary Canal
Throughout its length, the alimentary tract is composed of the same four tissue layers; the details of their structural arrangements vary to fit their specific functions. Starting from the lumen and moving outwards, these layers are the mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, and serosa, which is continuous with the mesentery.
 This image shows the cross section of the alimentary canal. The different layers of the alimentary canal are shown as concentric cylinders with major muscles and veins labeled. 

The wall of the alimentary canal has four basic tissue layers: the mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, and serosa.
The mucosa is referred to as a mucous membrane, because mucus production is a characteristic feature of gut epithelium. The membrane consists of epithelium, which is in direct contact with ingested food, and the lamina propria, a layer of connective tissue analogous to the dermis. In addition, the mucosa has a thin, smooth muscle layer, called the muscularis mucosa (not to be confused with the muscularis layer, described below).
            * Epithelium—In the mouth, pharynx, esophagus, and anal canal, the epithelium is primarily a non-keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium. In the stomach and intestines, it is a simple columnar epithelium. Notice that the epithelium is in direct contact with the lumen, the space inside the alimentary canal. Interspersed among its epithelial cells are goblet cells, which secrete mucus and fluid into the lumen, and enteroendocrine cells, which secrete hormones into the interstitial spaces between cells. Epithelial cells have a very brief lifespan, averaging from only a couple of days (in the mouth) to about a week (in the gut). This process of rapid renewal helps preserve the health of the alimentary canal, despite the wear and tear resulting from continued contact with foodstuffs.
            * Lamina propria—In addition to loose connective tissue, the lamina propria contains numerous blood and lymphatic vessels that transport nutrients absorbed through the alimentary canal to other parts of the body. The lamina propria also serves an immune function by housing clusters of lymphocytes, making up the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT). These lymphocyte clusters are particularly substantial in the distal ileum where they are known as Peyer’s patches. When you consider that the alimentary canal is exposed to foodborne bacteria and other foreign matter, it is not hard to appreciate why the immune system has evolved a means of defending against the pathogens encountered within it.
            * Muscularis mucosa—This thin layer of smooth muscle is in a constant state of tension, pulling the mucosa of the stomach and small intestine into undulating folds. These folds dramatically increase the surface area available for digestion and absorption.
As its name implies, the submucosa lies immediately beneath the mucosa. A broad layer of dense connective tissue, it connects the overlying mucosa to the underlying muscularis. It includes blood and lymphatic vessels (which transport absorbed nutrients), and a scattering of submucosal glands that release digestive secretions. Additionally, it serves as a conduit for a dense branching network of nerves, the submucosal plexus, which functions as described below.
The third layer of the alimentary canal is the muscalaris (also called the muscularis externa). The muscularis in the small intestine is made up of a double layer of smooth muscle: an inner circular layer and an outer longitudinal layer. The contractions of these layers promote mechanical digestion, expose more of the food to digestive chemicals, and move the food along the canal. In the most proximal and distal regions of the alimentary canal, including the mouth, pharynx, anterior part of the esophagus, and external anal sphincter, the muscularis is made up of skeletal muscle, which gives you voluntary control over swallowing and defecation. The basic two-layer structure found in the small intestine is modified in the organs proximal and distal to it. The stomach is equipped for its churning function by the addition of a third layer, the oblique muscle. While the colon has two layers like the small intestine, its longitudinal layer is segregated into three narrow parallel bands, the tenia coli, which make it look like a series of pouches rather than a simple tube.
The serosa is the portion of the alimentary canal superficial to the muscularis. Present only in the region of the alimentary canal within the abdominal cavity, it consists of a layer of visceral peritoneum overlying a layer of loose connective tissue. Instead of serosa, the mouth, pharynx, and esophagus have a dense sheath of collagen fibers called the adventitia. These tissues serve to hold the alimentary canal in place near the ventral surface of the vertebral column.
Nerve Supply
As soon as food enters the mouth, it is detected by receptors that send impulses along the sensory neurons of cranial nerves. Without these nerves, not only would your food be without taste, but you would also be unable to feel either the food or the structures of your mouth, and you would be unable to avoid biting yourself as you chew, an action enabled by the motor branches of cranial nerves.
Intrinsic innervation of much of the alimentary canal is provided by the enteric nervous system, which runs from the esophagus to the anus, and contains approximately 100 million motor, sensory, and interneurons (unique to this system compared to all other parts of the peripheral nervous system). These enteric neurons are grouped into two plexuses. The myenteric plexus (plexus of Auerbach) lies in the muscularis layer of the alimentary canal and is responsible for motility, especially the rhythm and force of the contractions of the muscularis. The submucosal plexus (plexus of Meissner) lies in the submucosal layer and is responsible for regulating digestive secretions and reacting to the presence of food.
Extrinsic innervations of the alimentary canal are provided by the autonomic nervous system, which includes both sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves. In general, sympathetic activation (the fight-or-flight response) restricts the activity of enteric neurons, thereby decreasing GI secretion and motility. In contrast, parasympathetic activation (the rest-and-digest response) increases GI secretion and motility by stimulating neurons of the enteric nervous system.
Blood Supply
The blood vessels serving the digestive system have two functions. They transport the protein and carbohydrate nutrients absorbed by mucosal cells after food is digested in the lumen. Lipids are absorbed via lacteals, tiny structures of the lymphatic system. The blood vessels’ second function is to supply the organs of the alimentary canal with the nutrients and oxygen needed to drive their cellular processes.
Specifically, the more anterior parts of the alimentary canal are supplied with blood by arteries branching off the aortic arch and thoracic aorta. Below this point, the alimentary canal is supplied with blood by arteries branching from the abdominal aorta. The celiac trunk services the liver, stomach, and duodenum, whereas the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries supply blood to the remaining small and large intestines.
The veins that collect nutrient-rich blood from the small intestine (where most absorption occurs) empty into the hepatic portal system. This venous network takes the blood into the liver where the nutrients are either processed or stored for later use. Only then does the blood drained from the alimentary canal viscera circulate back to the heart. To appreciate just how demanding the digestive process is on the cardiovascular system, consider that while you are “resting and digesting,” about one-fourth of the blood pumped with each heartbeat enters arteries serving the intestines.
The Peritoneum
The digestive organs within the abdominal cavity are held in place by the peritoneum, a broad serous membranous sac made up of squamous epithelial tissue surrounded by connective tissue. It is composed of two different regions: the parietal peritoneum, which lines the abdominal wall, and the visceral peritoneum, which envelopes the abdominal organs. The peritoneal cavity is the space bounded by the visceral and parietal peritoneal surfaces. A few milliliters of watery fluid act as a lubricant to minimize friction between the serosal surfaces of the peritoneum.
The visceral peritoneum includes multiple large folds that envelope various abdominal organs, holding them to the dorsal surface of the body wall. Within these folds are blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerves that innervate the organs with which they are in contact, supplying their adjacent organs. The five major peritoneal folds are described in Table 2. Note that during fetal development, certain digestive structures, including the first portion of the small intestine (called the duodenum), the pancreas, and portions of the large intestine (the ascending and descending colon, and the rectum) remain completely or partially posterior to the peritoneum. Thus, the location of these organs is described as retroperitoneal.


Table 2. The Five Major Peritoneal Folds
	Fold
	Description
	Greater omentum
	Apron-like structure that lies superficial to the small intestine and transverse colon; a site of fat deposition in people who are overweight
	Falciform ligament
	Anchors the liver to the anterior abdominal wall and inferior border of the diaphragm
	Lesser omentum
	Suspends the stomach from the inferior border of the liver; provides a pathway for structures connecting to the liver
	Mesentery
	Vertical band of tissue anterior to the lumbar vertebrae and anchoring all of the small intestine except the initial portion (the duodenum)
	Mesocolon
	Attaches two portions of the large intestine (the transverse and sigmoid colon) to the posterior abdominal wall


	

Chemical Digestion
Protein digestion occurs in the stomach and the duodenum through the action of three primary enzymes:
            1. Pepsin, secreted by the stomach.
            2. Trypsin, secreted by the pancreas.
            3. Chymotrypsin, secreted by the pancreas.
These enzymes break down food proteins into polypeptides that are then broken down by various exopeptidases and dipeptidases into amino acids. The digestive enzymes, however, are secreted mainly as their inactive precursors, the zymogens.
Thus, trypsin is secreted by the pancreas in the form of trypsinogen, which is activated in the duodenum by enterokinase to form trypsin. Trypsin then cleaves proteins into smaller polypeptides.
In humans, dietary starches are composed of glucose units arranged in long chains of polysaccharide called amylose. During digestion, the bonds between glucose molecules are broken by salivary and pancreatic amylase, and result in progressively smaller chains of glucose. This process produces the simple sugars glucose and maltose (two glucose molecules) that can be absorbed by the small intestine.
Sucrase is an enzyme that breaks down disaccharide sucrose, commonly known as table sugar, cane sugar, or beet sugar. Sucrose digestion yields the sugars fructose and glucose, which are readily absorbed by the small intestine.
Lactase is an enzyme that breaks down the disaccharide lactose into its component parts, glucose and galactose, that are absorbed by the small intestine. Approximately half the adult population produces only small amounts of lactase and are therefore unable to eat milk-based foods. This condition is commonly known as lactose intolerance.
The digestion of certain fats begins in the mouth, where lingual lipase breaks down short chain lipids into diglycerides. The presence of fat in the small intestine produces hormones that stimulate the release of pancreatic lipase from the pancreas, and bile from the liver, to enable the breakdown of fats into fatty acids. The complete digestion of one molecule of fat (a triglyceride) results in three fatty acid molecules and one glycerol molecule.
DNA and RNA are broken down into mononucleotides by the nucleases deoxyribonuclease and ribonuclease (DNase and RNase), which are released by the pancreas.
 This is a diagram of carbohydrate digestion. A diagram of the action of oligosaccharide-cleaving enzymes in the small intestine. An alpha dextrin molecule breaks down to maltase, sucrase, or alpha-dextrinase. Maltotriose breaks down to maltase, sucrase, or alpha-dextrinase. Maltose breaks down to maltase and sucrase. Galactose breaks down to lactase. Sucrose breaks down to sucrase. 

Carbohydrate digestion: A diagram of the action of the oligosaccharide-cleaving enzymes in the small intestine.
 This is a diagram of lipid digestion, which involves the formation of micelles in the presence of bile salts, and the passage of micelles and fatty acids through the unstirred layer. The diagram depicts dietary fat at the top, with pancreatic lipase and bile salts forming micelles that will pass through the unstirred layer at the bottom of the diagram. 

Lipid digestion: Lipid digestion involves the formation of micelles in the presence of bile salts, and the passage of micelles and fatty acids through the unstirred layer. The diagram depicts dietary fat at the top, with pancreatic lipase and bile salts forming micelles that will pass through the unstirred layer at the bottom of the diagram.
The Small Intestine
The small intestine is the part of the gastrointestinal tract between the stomach and the large intestine where much of the digestion of food takes place. The primary function of the small intestine is the absorption of nutrients and minerals found in food.
Digested nutrients pass into the blood vessels in the wall of the intestine through a process of diffusion. The inner wall, or mucosa, of the small intestine is lined with simple columnar epithelial tissue.
Structurally, the mucosa is covered in wrinkles or folds called plicae circulares—these are permanent features in the wall of the organ. They are distinct from the rugae, which are non-permanent features that allow for distention and contraction.
From the plicae circulares project microscopic finger-like pieces of tissue called villi (Latin for shaggy hair). The individual epithelial cells also have finger-like projections known as microvilli. The function of the plicae circulares, the villi, and the microvilli is to increase the amount of surface area available for the absorption of nutrients.
Each villus has a network of capillaries and fine lymphatic vessels called lacteals close to its surface. The epithelial cells of the villi transport nutrients from the lumen of the intestine into these capillaries ( amino acids and carbohydrates) and lacteals (lipids).
The absorbed substances are transported via the blood vessels to different organs of the body where they are used to build complex substances, such as the proteins required by our body. The food that remains undigested and unabsorbed passes into the large intestine.
Absorption of the majority of nutrients takes place in the jejunum, with the following notable exceptions:
            * Iron is absorbed in the duodenum.
            * Vitamin B12 and bile salts are absorbed in the terminal ileum.
            * Water and lipids are absorbed by passive diffusion throughout the small intestine.
            * Sodium bicarbonate is absorbed by active transport and glucose and amino acid co-transport.
            * Fructose is absorbed by facilitated diffusion.
Digestive Enzymes and the Small Intestine
The small intestine is where most chemical digestion occurs. Most of the digestive enzymes that act in the small intestine are secreted by the pancreas and enter the small intestine via the pancreatic duct.
The enzymes enter the small intestine in response to the hormone cholecystokinin, which is produced in the small intestine in response to the presence of nutrients. The hormone secretin also causes bicarbonate to be released into the small intestine from the pancreas in order to neutralize the potentially harmful acid that comes from the stomach.
The three major classes of nutrients that undergo digestion are:
            1. Proteins. These are degraded into small peptides and amino acids before absorption. Their chemical breakdown begins in the stomach and continues in the large intestine. Proteolytic enzymes, including trypsin and chymotrypsin, are secreted by the pancreas and cleave proteins into smaller peptides. Carboxypeptidase, which is a pancreatic brush border enzyme, splits one amino acid at a time. Aminopeptidase and dipeptidase free the final amino acid products.
            2. Lipids (fats). These are degraded into fatty acids and glycerol. Pancreatic lipase breaks down the triglycerides into free fatty acids and monoglycerides. Pancreatic lipase works with the help of the salts from the bile secreted by the liver and the gall bladder. Bile salts attach to triglycerides to help emulsify them and aid access by pancreatic lipase. This occurs because the lipase is water soluble, but the fatty triglycerides are hydrophobic and tend to orient towards each other and away from the watery intestinal surroundings. The bile salts are the main thing that holds the triglycerides in their watery surroundings until the lipase can break them into the smaller components that can enter the villi for absorption.
            3. Carbohydrates. Some carbohydrates are degraded into simple sugars, or monosaccharides (e.g., glucose ). Pancreatic amylase breaks down some carbohydrates (notably starch) into oligosaccharides. Other carbohydrates pass undigested into the large intestine for further handling by intestinal bacteria.
Brush Border Enzymes
Brush border enzymes take over from there. The most important brush border enzymes are dextrinase and glucoamylase that further break down oligosaccharides. Other brush border enzymes are maltase, sucrase, and lactase.
Lactase is absent in most adult humans and so lactose, like most polysaccharides, is not digested in their small intestine. Some carbohydrates, such as cellulose, are not digested at all despite being made of multiple glucose units. This is because the cellulose is made out of beta-glucose that makes the inter-monosaccharidal bindings different from the ones present in starch, which consists of alpha-glucose. Humans lack the enzyme for splitting the beta-glucose-bonds, something reserved for herbivores and the bacteria from the large intestine.
The fat-soluble vitamins A, D, and E are absorbed in the upper small intestine. The factors that cause the malabsorption of fat can also affect the absorption of these vitamins. Vitamin B12 is absorbed in the ilium and must be bound to intrinsic factor, a protein secreted in the stomach, in order to be absorbed. If intrinsic factor is missing, then Vitamin B12 is not absorbed and pernicious anemia results.
Of the water-soluble vitamins, the transport of folate and B12 across the apical membrane are independent from sodium (Na+), but the other water-soluble vitamins are absorbed by Na+ co-transporters. In physiology, the primary ions of electrolytes are sodium (Na+), potassium (K+), calcium (Ca2+), magnesium (Mg2+), chloride (Cl−), hydrogen phosphate (HPO42−), and hydrogen carbonate (HCO3−).
Sodium is the main electrolyte found in extracellular fluid and is involved in fluid balance and blood pressure control. Electrolyte balance is regulated by hormones, generally with the kidneys flushing out excess levels. In humans, electrolyte homeostasis is regulated by hormones such as the antidiuretic, aldosterone, and parathyroid hormones.
Serious electrolyte disturbances, such as dehydration and over-hydration, may lead to cardiac and neurological complications that, unless they are rapidly resolved, will result in a medical emergency. Water and minerals are reabsorbed back into the blood in the colon (large intestine) where the pH is slightly acidic—about 5.6 to 6.9.






22. Structure and function of the human kidney. The nephron. Filtration and reabsorption. 
The kidneys are the primary functional organ of the renal system. They are essential in homeostatic functions such as the regulation of electrolytes, maintenance of acid–base balance, and the regulation of blood pressure (by maintaining salt and water balance). They serve the body as a natural filter of the blood and remove wastes that are excreted through the urine. 
They are also responsible for the reabsorption of water, glucose, and amino acids, and will maintain the balance of these molecules in the body. In addition, the kidneys produce hormones including calcitriol, erythropoietin, and the enzyme renin, which are involved in renal and hemotological physiological processes.
Anatomical Location
The kidneys are a pair of bean-shaped, brown organs about the size of your fist. They are covered by the renal capsule, which is a tough capsule of fibrous connective tissue. Adhering to the surface of each kidney are two layers of fat to help cushion them. 
The asymmetry within the abdominal cavity caused by the liver typically results in the right kidney being slightly lower than the left, and left kidney being located slightly more medial than the right. The right kidney sits just below the diaphragm and posterior to the liver, the left below the diaphragm and posterior to the spleen.
 This is a drawing of human kidneys, viewed from behind with the spine removed. The left kidney is slightly higher than the right one due to the asymmetry within the abdominal cavity caused by the liver. 

Resting on top of each kidney is an adrenal gland (adrenal meaning on top of renal), which are involved in some renal system processes despite being a primarily endocrine organ. The upper parts of the kidneys are partially protected by lower ribs, and each whole kidney and adrenal gland are surrounded by two layers of fat (the perirenal and pararenal fat) and the renal fascia. 
The kidneys are located at the rear wall of the abdominal cavity just above the waistline and are protected by the ribcage. They are considered retroperitoneal, which means that they lie behind the peritoneum, the membrane lining of the abdominal cavity. 
There are a number of important external structures connecting the kidneys to the rest of the body. The renal artery branches off from the lower part of the aorta and provides the blood supply to the kidneys. Renal veins take blood away from the kidneys into the inferior vena cava. The ureters are structures that come out of the kidneys, bringing urine downward into the bladder.
There are three major regions of the kidney: 
            1. Renal cortex
            2. Renal medulla
            3. Renal pelvis
The renal cortex is a space between the medulla and the outer capsule. The renal medulla contains the majority of the length of nephrons, the main functional component of the kidney that filters fluid from blood. The renal pelvis connects the kidney with the circulatory and nervous systems from the rest of the body.
Renal Cortex
The kidneys are surrounded by a renal cortex, a layer of tissue that is also covered by renal fascia (connective tissue) and the renal capsule. The renal cortex is granular tissue due to the presence of nephrons—the functional unit of the kidney—that are located deeper within the kidney, within the renal pyramids of the medulla. 
The cortex provides a space for arterioles and venules from the renal artery and vein, as well as the glomerular capillaries, to perfuse the nephrons of the kidney. Erythropotein, a hormone necessary for the synthesis of new red blood cells, is also produced in the renal cortex.
 This is a drawing of the kidney. It highlights the kidney's three main areas, which are the outer cortex, a medulla in the middle, and the renal pelvis. 



Renal Medulla
The medulla is the inner region of the parenchyma of the kidney.
The medulla consists of multiple pyramidal tissue masses, called the renal pyramids, which are triangle structures that contain a dense network of nephrons.
At one end of each nephron, in the cortex of the kidney, is a cup-shaped structure called the Bowman’s capsule. It surrounds a tuft of capillaries called the glomerulus that carries blood from the renal arteries into the nephron, where plasma is filtered through the capsule. 
After entering the capsule, the filtered fluid flows along the proximal convoluted tubule to the loop of Henle and then to the distal convoluted tubule and the collecting ducts, which flow into the ureter. Each of the different components of the nephrons are selectively permeable to different molecules, and enable the complex regulation of water and ion concentrations in the body.
Renal Pelvis
The renal pelvis contains the hilium. The hilum is the concave part of the bean-shape where blood vessels and nerves enter and exit the kidney; it is also the point of exit for the ureters—the urine-bearing tubes that exit the kidney and empty into the urinary bladder. The renal pelvis connects the kidney to the rest of the body.
A Nephron
A nephron is the basic structural and functional unit of the kidneys that regulates water and soluble substances in the blood by filtering the blood, reabsorbing what is needed, and excreting the rest as urine. Its function is vital for homeostasis of blood volume, blood pressure, and plasma osmolarity. It is regulated by the neuroendocrine system by hormones such as antidiuretic hormone, aldosterone, and parathyroid hormone.
  

The basic physiology of a nephron within a kidney: The labels are: 1. Glomerulus, 2. Efferent arteriole, 3. Bowman’s capsule, 4. Proximal tube, 5. Cortical collecting tube, 6. Distal tube, 7. Loop of Henle, 8. Collecting duct, 9. Peritubular capillaries, 10. Arcuate vein, 11. Arcuate artery, 12. Afferent arteriole, and 13. Juxtaglomerular apparatus.
The Glomerulus
The glomerulus is a capillary tuft that receives its blood supply from an afferent arteriole of the renal circulation. Here, fluid and solutes are filtered out of the blood and into the space made by Bowman’s capsule. 
A group of specialized cells known as juxtaglomerular apparatus (JGA) are located around the afferent arteriole where it enters the renal corpuscle. The JGA secretes an enzyme called renin, due to a variety of stimuli, and it is involved in the process of blood volume homeostasis.
The Bowman’s capsule (also called the glomerular capsule) surrounds the glomerulus. It is composed of visceral (simple squamous epithelial cells; inner) and parietal (simple squamous epithelial cells; outer) layers. The visceral layer lies just beneath the thickened glomerular basement membrane and only allows fluid and small molecules like glucose and ions like sodium to pass through into the nephron.
Red blood cells and large proteins, such as serum albumins, cannot pass through the glomerulus under normal circumstances. However, in some injuries they may be able to pass through and can cause blood and protein content to enter the urine, which is a sign of problems in the kidney.
Proximal Convoluted Tubule
The proximal tubule is the first site of water reabsorption into the bloodstream, and the site where the majority of water and salt reabsorption takes place. Water reabsorption in the proximal convoluted tubule occurs due to both passive diffusion across the basolateral membrane, and active transport from Na+/K+/ATPase pumps that actively transports sodium across the basolateral membrane. 
Water and glucose follow sodium through the basolateral membrane via an osmotic gradient, in a process called co-transport. Approximately 2/3rds of water in the nephron and 100% of the glucose in the nephron are reabsorbed by cotransport in the proximal convoluted tubule. 
Fluid leaving this tubule generally is unchanged due to the equivalent water and ion reabsorption, with an osmolarity (ion concentration) of 300 mOSm/L, which is the same osmolarity as normal plasma.
The Loop of Henle
The loop of Henle is a U-shaped tube that consists of a descending limb and ascending limb. It transfers fluid from the proximal to the distal tubule. The descending limb is highly permeable to water but completely impermeable to ions, causing a large amount of water to be reabsorbed, which increases fluid osmolarity to about 1200 mOSm/L. In contrast, the ascending limb of Henle’s loop is impermeable to water but highly permeable to ions, which causes a large drop in the osmolarity of fluid passing through the loop, from 1200 mOSM/L to 100 mOSm/L.
Distal Convoluted Tubule and Collecting Duct
The distal convoluted tubule and collecting duct is the final site of reabsorption in the nephron. Unlike the other components of the nephron, its permeability to water is variable depending on a hormone stimulus to enable the complex regulation of blood osmolarity, volume, pressure, and pH. 
Normally, it is impermeable to water and permeable to ions, driving the osmolarity of fluid even lower. However, anti-diuretic hormone (secreted from the pituitary gland as a part of homeostasis) will act on the distal convoluted tubule to increase the permeability of the tubule to water to increase water reabsorption. This example results in increased blood volume and increased blood pressure. Many other hormones will induce other important changes in the distal convoluted tubule that fulfill the other homeostatic functions of the kidney.
The collecting duct is similar in function to the distal convoluted tubule and generally responds the same way to the same hormone stimuli. It is, however, different in terms of histology. The osmolarity of fluid through the distal tubule and collecting duct is highly variable depending on hormone stimulus. After passage through the collecting duct, the fluid is brought into the ureter, where it leaves the kidney as urine.








23. Mechanism of muscle contraction, the role of calcium ion. The structure of skeletal (striated), cardiac and smooth muscle tissues. 
The Musculoskeletal System
The muscular system is made up of muscle tissue and is responsible for functions such as maintenance of posture, locomotion and control of various circulatory systems. This includes the beating of the heart and the movement of food through the digestive system. The muscular system is closely associated with the skeletal system in facilitating movement. Both voluntary and involuntary muscular system functions are controlled by the nervous system.
Muscle is a highly-specialized soft tissue that produces tension which results in the generation of force. Muscle cells, or myocytes, contain myofibrils comprised of actin and myosin myofilaments which slide past each other producing tension that changes the shape of the myocyte. Numerous myocytes make up muscle tissue and the controlled production of tension in these cells can generate significant force.
Muscle tissue can be classified functionally as voluntary or involuntary and morphologically as striated or non-striated. Voluntary refers to whether the muscle is under conscious control, while striation refers to the presence of visible banding within myocytes caused by the organization of myofibrils to produce constant tension.
Muscles contract in a repeated pattern of binding and releasing between the two thin and thick strands of the sarcomere. ATP is critical to prepare myosin for binding and to “recharge” the myosin.
The Cross-Bridge Muscle Contraction Cycle
ATP first binds to myosin, moving it to a high-energy state. The ATP is hydrolyzed into ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi) by the enzyme ATPase. The energy released during ATP hydrolysis changes the angle of the myosin head into a “cocked” position, ready to bind to actin if the sites are available. ADP and Pi remain attached; myosin is in its high energy configuration.
 image 

Cross-bridge muscle contraction cycle: The cross-bridge muscle contraction cycle, which is triggered by Ca2+ binding to the actin active site, is shown. With each contraction cycle, actin moves relative to myosin.
The muscle contraction cycle is triggered by calcium ions binding to the protein complex troponin, exposing the active-binding sites on the actin. As soon as the actin-binding sites are uncovered, the high-energy myosin head bridges the gap, forming a cross-bridge. Once myosin binds to the actin, the Pi is released, and the myosin undergoes a conformational change to a lower energy state. As myosin expends the energy, it moves through the “power stroke,” pulling the actin filament toward the M-line. When the actin is pulled approximately 10 nm toward the M-line, the sarcomere shortens and the muscle contracts. At the end of the power stroke, the myosin is in a low-energy position.
After the power stroke, ADP is released, but the cross-bridge formed is still in place. ATP then binds to myosin, moving the myosin to its high-energy state, releasing the myosin head from the actin active site. ATP can then attach to myosin, which allows the cross-bridge cycle to start again; further muscle contraction can occur. Therefore, without ATP, muscles would remain in their contracted state, rather than their relaxed state.
Regulatory Proteins
The binding of the myosin heads to the muscle actin is a highly-regulated process. When a muscle is in a resting state, actin and myosin are separated. To keep actin from binding to the active site on myosin, regulatory proteins block the molecular binding sites. Tropomyosin blocks myosin binding sites on actin molecules, preventing cross-bridge formation, which prevents contraction in a muscle without nervous input. The protein complex troponin binds to tropomyosin, helping to position it on the actin molecule.
Regulation of Troponin and Tropomyosin
To enable muscle contraction, tropomyosin must change conformation and uncover the myosin-binding site on an actin molecule, thereby allowing cross-bridge formation. Troponin, which regulates the tropomyosin, is activated by calcium, which is kept at extremely low concentrations in the sarcoplasm. If present, calcium ions bind to troponin, causing conformational changes in troponin that allow tropomyosin to move away from the myosin-binding sites on actin. Once the tropomyosin is removed, a cross-bridge can form between actin and myosin, triggering contraction. Cross-bridge cycling continues until Ca2+ ions and ATP are no longer available; tropomyosin again covers the binding sites on actin.
 image 

Muscle contraction: Calcium remains in the sarcoplasmic reticulum until released by a stimulus. Calcium then binds to troponin, causing the troponin to change shape and remove the tropomyosin from the binding sites. Cross-bridge cling continues until the calcium ions and ATP are no longer available.
Calcium-Induced Calcium Release
The concentration of calcium within muscle cells is controlled by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a unique form of endoplasmic reticulum in the sarcoplasm. Muscle contraction ends when calcium ions are pumped back into the sarcoplasmic reticulum, allowing the muscle cell to relax. During stimulation of the muscle cell, the motor neuron releases the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, which then binds to a post-synaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.
A change in the receptor conformation causes an action potential, activating voltage-gated L-type calcium channels, which are present in the plasma membrane. The inward flow of calcium from the L-type calcium channels activates ryanodine receptors to release calcium ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This mechanism is called calcium-induced calcium release (CICR). It is not understood whether the physical opening of the L-type calcium channels or the presence of calcium causes the ryanodine receptors to open. The outflow of calcium allows the myosin heads access to the actin cross-bridge binding sites, permitting muscle contraction.
Excitation–Contraction Coupling
Excitation–contraction coupling is the physiological process of converting an electrical stimulus to a mechanical response. It is the link (transduction) between the action potential generated in the sarcolemma and the start of a muscle contraction.
 image 

Excitation-contraction coupling: This diagram shows excitation-contraction coupling in a skeletal muscle contraction. The sarcoplasmic reticulum is a specialized endoplasmic reticulum found in muscle cells.
Communication between Nerves and Muscles
A neural signal is the electrical trigger for calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the sarcoplasm. Each skeletal muscle fiber is controlled by a motor neuron, which conducts signals from the brain or spinal cord to the muscle. Electrical signals called action potentials travel along the neuron’s axon, which branches through the muscle, connecting to individual muscle fibers at a neuromuscular junction. The area of the sarcolemma on the muscle fiber that interacts with the neuron is called the motor-end plate. The end of the neuron’s axon is called the synaptic terminal; it does not actually contact the motor-end plate. A small space called the synaptic cleft separates the synaptic terminal from the motor-end plate.
Because neuron axons do not directly contact the motor-end plate, communication occurs between nerves and muscles through neurotransmitters. Neuron action potentials cause the release of neurotransmitters from the synaptic terminal into the synaptic cleft, where they can then diffuse across the synaptic cleft and bind to a receptor molecule on the motor end plate. The motor end plate possesses junctional folds: folds in the sarcolemma that create a large surface area for the neurotransmitter to bind to receptors. The receptors are sodium channels that open to allow the passage of Na+ into the cell when they receive neurotransmitter signal.
Depolarization in the Sarcolemma
Acetylcholine (ACh) is a neurotransmitter released by motor neurons that binds to receptors in the motor end plate. Neurotransmitter release occurs when an action potential travels down the motor neuron’s axon, resulting in altered permeability of the synaptic terminal membrane and an influx of calcium. The Ca2+ ions allow synaptic vesicles to move to and bind with the presynaptic membrane (on the neuron) and release neurotransmitter from the vesicles into the synaptic cleft. Once released by the synaptic terminal, ACh diffuses across the synaptic cleft to the motor end plate, where it binds with ACh receptors.
As a neurotransmitter binds, these ion channels open, and Na+ ions cross the membrane into the muscle cell. This reduces the voltage difference between the inside and outside of the cell, which is called depolarization. As ACh binds at the motor end plate, this depolarization is called an end-plate potential. The depolarization then spreads along the sarcolemma and down the T tubules, creating an action potential. The action potential triggers the sarcoplasmic reticulum to release of Ca2+, which activate troponin and stimulate muscle contraction.
ACh is broken down by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE) into acetyl and choline. AChE resides in the synaptic cleft, breaking down ACh so that it does not remain bound to ACh receptors, which would cause unwanted extended muscle contraction.
Types of Muscle:
The above classifications describe three forms of muscle tissue that perform a wide range of diverse functions.
Skeletal Muscle
Skeletal muscle mainly attaches to the skeletal system via tendons to maintain posture and control movement. For example, contraction of the biceps muscle, attached to the scapula and radius, will raise the forearm. Some skeletal muscle can attach directly to other muscles or to the skin, as seen in the face where numerous muscles control facial expression.
Skeletal muscle is under voluntary control, although this can be subconscious when maintaining posture or balance. Morphologically skeletal myocytes are elongated and tubular and appear striated with multiple peripheral nuclei.
Cardiac Muscle Tissue
Cardiac muscle tissue is found only in the heart, where cardiac contractions pump blood throughout the body and maintain blood pressure.
As with skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle is striated; however it is not consciously controlled and so is classified as involuntary. Cardiac muscle can be further differentiated from skeletal muscle by the presence of intercalated discs that control the synchronized contraction of cardiac tissues. Cardiac myocytes are shorter than skeletal equivalents and contain only one or two centrally located nuclei.
Smooth Muscle Tissue
Smooth muscle tissue is associated with numerous organs and tissue systems, such as the digestive system and respiratory system. It plays an important role in the regulation of flow in such systems, such as aiding the movement of food through the digestive system via peristalsis.
Smooth muscle is non-striated and involuntary. Smooth muscle myocytes are spindle shaped with a single centrally located nucleus.
Skeletal Muscle Fiber Structure
Myocytes, sometimes called muscle fibers, form the bulk of muscle tissue. They are bound together by perimysium, a sheath of connective tissue, into bundles called fascicles, which are in turn bundled together to form muscle tissue. Myocytes contain numerous specialized cellular structures which facilitate their contraction and therefore that of the muscle as a whole.
The highly specialized structure of myocytes has led to the creation of terminology which differentiates them from generic animal cells.
Generic cell > Myocyte
Cytoplasm > Sarcoplasm
Cell membrane > Sarcolemma
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum > Sarcoplasmic reticulum
Myocyte Structure
Myocytes can be incredibly large, with diameters of up to 100 micrometers and lengths of up to 30 centimeters. The sarcoplasm is rich with glycogen and myoglobin, which store the glucose and oxygen required for energy generation, and is almost completely filled with myofibrils, the long fibers composed of myofilaments that facilitate muscle contraction.
The sarcolemma of myocytes contains numerous invaginations (pits) called transverse tubules which are usually perpendicular to the length of the myocyte. Transverse tubules play an important role in supplying the myocyte with Ca+ ions, which are key for muscle contraction.
Each myocyte contains multiple nuclei due to their derivation from multiple myoblasts, progenitor cells that give rise to myocytes. These myoblasts are located to the periphery of the myocyte and flattened so as not to impact myocyte contraction.
 image 

Myocyte: Skeletal muscle cell: A skeletal muscle cell is surrounded by a plasma membrane called the sarcolemma with a cytoplasm called the sarcoplasm. A muscle fiber is composed of many myofibrils, packaged into orderly units.
Myofibril Structure
Each myocyte can contain many thousands of myofibrils. Myofibrils run parallel to the myocyte and typically run for its entire length, attaching to the sarcolemma at either end. Each myofibril is surrounded by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, which is closely associated with the transverse tubules. The sarcoplasmic reticulum acts as a sink of Ca+ ions, which are released upon signalling from the transverse tubules.
Sarcomeres
Myofibrils are composed of long myofilaments of actin, myosin, and other associated proteins. These proteins are organized into regions termed sarcomeres, the functional contractile region of the myocyte. Within the sarcomere actin and myosin, myofilaments are interlaced with each other and slide over each other via the sliding filament model of contraction. The regular organization of these sarcomeres gives skeletal and cardiac muscle their distinctive striated appearance.
 This diagram of a microfibril includes the terms sarcomere, Z-line, M-line, thin filament, and thick filament. 

Sarcomere: The sarcomere is the functional contractile region of the myocyte, and defines the region of interaction between a set of thick and thin filaments.
Myofilaments (Thick and Thin Filaments)
Myofibrils are composed of smaller structures called myofilaments. There are two main types of myofilaments: thick filaments and thin filaments. Thick filaments are composed primarily of myosin proteins, the tails of which bind together leaving the heads exposed to the interlaced thin filaments. Thin filaments are composed of actin, tropomyosin, and troponin. The molecular model of contraction which describes the interaction between actin and myosin myofilaments is called the cross-bridge cycle.
Movement often requires the contraction of a skeletal muscle, as can be observed when the bicep muscle in the arm contracts, drawing the forearm up towards the trunk. The sliding filament model describes the process used by muscles to contract. It is a cycle of repetitive events that causes actin and myosin myofilaments to slide over each other, contracting the sarcomere and generating tension in the muscle.
Sarcomere Structure
To understand the sliding filament model requires an understanding of sarcomere structure. A sarcomere is defined as the segment between two neighbouring, parallel Z-lines. Z lines are composed of a mixture of actin myofilaments and molecules of the highly elastic protein titin crosslinked by alpha-actinin. Actin myofilaments attach directly to the Z-lines, whereas myosin myofilaments attach via titin molecules.
Surrounding the Z-line is the I-band, the region where actin myofilaments are not superimposed by myosin myofilaments. The I-band is spanned by the titin molecule connecting the Z-line with a myosin filament.
The region between two neighboring, parallel I-bands is known as the A-band and contains the entire length of single myosin myofilaments. Within the A-band is a region known as the H-band, which is the region not superimposed by actin myofilaments. Within the H-band is the M-line, which is composed of myosin myofilaments and titin molecules crosslinked by myomesin.
Titin molecules connect the Z-line with the M-line and provide a scaffold for myosin myofilaments. Their elasticity provides the underpinning of muscle contraction. Titin molecules are thought to play a key role as a molecular ruler maintaining parallel alignment within the sarcomere. Another protein, nebulin, is thought to perform a similar role for actin myofilaments.
Model of Contraction
The molecular mechanism whereby myosin and acting myofilaments slide over each other is termed the cross-bridge cycle. During muscle contraction, the heads of myosin myofilaments quickly bind and release in a ratcheting fashion, pulling themselves along the actin myofilament.
At the level of the sliding filament model, expansion and contraction only occurs within the I and H-bands. The myofilaments themselves do not contract or expand and so the A-band remains constant.
 This diagram describes the sliding filament model of contraction. Terms include A-band, I-band, H-band, CapZ, titin, Z-line, myocin head, myocin tail, actin filament, relaxed, contracted, and M-line. 

The sarcomere and the sliding filament model of contraction: During contraction myosin ratchets along actin myofilaments compressing the I and H bands. During stretching this tension is release and the I and H bands expand. The A-band remains constant throughout as the length of the myosin myofilaments does not change.
The amount of force and movement generated by an individual sarcomere is small. However, when multiplied by the number of sarcomeres in a myofibril, myofibrils in a myocyte and myocytes in a muscle, the amount of force and movement generated is significant.






24. The nervous tissue. Nerve cells and glial cells. Generation and conduction of neuronal signals. Resting and action potential. 
Nervous tissue is one of four major classes of tissues. It is specialized tissue found in the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. It consists of neurons and supporting cells called neuroglia.
The nervous system is responsible for the control of the body and the communication among its parts. Nervous tissue contains two categories of cells—neurons and neuroglia.
Neurons
Neurons are highly specialized nerve cells that generate and conduct nerve impulses. A typical neuron consists of dendrites, the cell body, and an axon.
Dendrites
Dendrites are responsible for responding to stimuli; they receive incoming signals towards the cell body. The axons are responsible for transmitting impulses over long distances from cell body. The cell body is like a factory for the neuron. It produces all the proteins and contains specialized organelles such as nucleus, granules and Nissl bodies.
  

Neuron: This image illustrates the parts of a neuron. The dendrites receive incoming signals while axons propagate signals away from the neuron cell body. The myelin sheath surrounds and insulates the axon.
Dendrite
The axon is surrounded by a whitish, fatty layer called the myelin sheath. Outside the myelin sheath there is a cellular layer called the neurilemma.
Schwann Cells
In the peripheral nervous system, Schwann cells are neuroglia cells that support neuronal function by increasing the speed of  impulse propagation. The Schwann cells are underlain by the medullary sheath. The medullary sheath is interrupted at intervals by the nodes of Ranvier.
The nervous system consists of nervous tissue, which is composed of two principal types of cells called neuron and neuroglia


Nervous tissue, one of the four main tissue types, is composed of neurons and supporting cells called neuroglia. Neuroglia are also called “glial cells.”
Neuroglia
There are six types of neuroglia—four in the central nervous system and two in the PNS. These glial cells are involved in many specialized functions apart from support of the neurons. Neuroglia in the CNS include astrocytes, microglial cells, ependymal cells and oligodendrocytes. In the PNS, satellite cells and Schwann cells are the two kinds of neuroglia.
Astrocytes
Astrocytes are shaped like a star and are the most abundant glial cell in the CNS. They have many radiating processes which help in clinging to the neurons and capillaries. They support and brace the neurons and anchor them to the nutrient supply lines. They also help in the guiding the migration of young neurons. Astrocytes control the chemical environment around the neurons.
Microglial Cells
Microglial cells are small and ovoid un shape with thorny processes. They are found in the CNS. When invading microorganism or dead neurons are present, the microglial cells can transform into a phagocytic macrophage and help in cleaning the neuronal debris.
Ependymal Cells
Ependymal cells are ciliated and line the central cavities of the brain and spinal cord where they form a fairly permeable barrier between the cerebrospinal fluid that fills these cavities and the tissue cells of the CNS.
Oligodendrocytes
Oligodendrocytes line up along the nerves and produce an insulating cover called myelin sheath. They are found in the CNS.
Satellite Cells
Satellite cells surround neuron cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system (PNS). They are analogous to the astrocytes in the CNS.
Schwann Cells
Schwann cells surround all nerve fibers in the peripheral nervous system and form myelin sheaths around the nerve fibers. They are found in the PNS. Their function is similar to oligodendrocytes.
Neurons
Neurons consist of cell body and one or more slender processes. The neuronal cell body consists of a nucleus and rough endoplasmic reticulum or Nissl Bodies. The cell body is the major biosynthetic center of a neuron and contains the usual organelles for the synthesis of proteins and other chemicals. Arm like processes extend from the cell body to all neurons.
The two types of neuron processes are called dendrites and axons. Dendrites are motor neurons that are short and have a large surface area for receiving signals from other neurons. Dendrites convey incoming messages towards the cell body and are therefore called the receptive input region.
The axon arises from the cone shaped portion of the cell body called the axon hillock. Functionally, the axon is the conducting region of the neuron and is responsible for generating and transmitting impulses typically away from the cell body. A single axon routes the nerve impulse from the cell body to another neuron or an effector organ. The axon can have many terminal branches, so each time the nerve fires, it can stimulate more than one cell.
Resting membrane potential
Neurons have a negative concentration gradient most of the time, meaning there are more positively charged ions outside than inside the cell. This regular state of a negative concentration gradient is called resting membrane potential. During the resting membrane potential there are:
            * more sodium ions (Na+) outside than inside the neuron
            * more potassium ions (K+) inside than outside the neuron
The concentration of ions isn’t static though! Ions are flowing in and out of the neuron constantly as the ions try to equalize their concentrations. The cell however maintains a fairly consistent negative concentration gradient (between -40 to -90 millivolts). How?
            * The neuron cell membrane is super permeable to potassium ions, and so lots of potassium leaks out of the neuron through potassium leakage channels (holes in the cell wall).
            * The neuron cell membrane is partially permeable to sodium ions, so sodium atoms slowly leak into the neuron through sodium leakage channels.
            * The cell wants to maintain a negative resting membrane potential, so it has a pump that pumps potassium back into the cell and pumps sodium out of the cell at the same time.
How action potentials work
Action potentials (those electrical impulses that send signals around your body) are nothing more than a temporary shift (from negative to positive) in the neuron’s membrane potential caused by ions suddenly flowing in and out of the neuron. During the resting state (before an action potential occurs) all of the gated sodium and potassium channels are closed. These gated channels are different from the leakage channels, and only open once an action potential has been triggered. We say these channels are “voltage-gated” because they are open and closed depends on the voltage difference across the cell membrane. Voltage-gated sodium channels have two gates (gate m and gate h), while the potassium channel only has one (gate n).
            * Gate m (the activation gate) is normally closed, and opens when the cell starts to get more positive.
            * Gate h (the deactivation gate) is normally open, and swings shut when the cells gets too positive.
            * Gate n is normally closed, but slowly opens when the cell is depolarized (very positive).
Voltage-gated sodium channels exist in one of three states:
            1. Deactivated (closed) - at rest, channels are deactivated. The m gate is closed, and does not let sodium ions through.
            2. Activated (open) - when a current passes through and changes the voltage difference across a membrane, the channel will activate and the m gate will open.
            3. Inactivated (closed) - as the neuron depolarizes, the h gate swings shut and blocks sodium ions from entering the cell.
Voltage-gated potassium channels are either open or closed.
  

There are three main events that take place during an action potential:
            1. A triggering event occurs that depolarizes the cell body. This signal comes from other cells connecting to the neuron, and it causes positively charged ions to flow into the cell body. Positive ions still flow into the cell to depolarize it, but these ions pass through channels that open when a specific chemical, known as a neurotransmitter, binds to the channel and tells it to open. Neurotransmitters are released by cells near the dendrites, often as the end result of their own action potential! These incoming ions bring the membrane potential closer to 0, which is known as depolarization. An object is polar if there is some difference between more negative and more positive areas. As positive ions flow into the negative cell, that difference, and thus the cell’s polarity, decrease. If the cell body gets positive enough that it can trigger the voltage-gated sodium channels found in the axon, then the action potential will be sent.
            2. Depolarization - makes the cell less polar (membrane potential gets smaller as ions quickly begin to equalize the concentration gradients) . Voltage-gated sodium channels at the part of the axon closest to the cell body activate, thanks to the recently depolarized cell body. This lets positively charged sodium ions flow into the negatively charged axon, and depolarize the surrounding axon. We can think of the channels opening like dominoes falling down - once one channel opens and lets positive ions in, it sets the stage for the channels down the axon to do the same thing. Though this stage is known as depolarization, the neuron actually swings past equilibrium and becomes positively charged as the action potential passes through!
            3. Repolarization - brings the cell back to resting potential. The inactivation gates of the sodium channels close, stopping the inward rush of positive ions. At the same time, the potassium channels open. There is much more potassium inside the cell than out, so when these channels open, more potassium exits than comes in. This means the cell loses positively charged ions, and returns back toward its resting state.
            4. Hyperpolarization - makes the cell more negative than its typical resting membrane potential. As the action potential passes through, potassium channels stay open a little bit longer, and continue to let positive ions exit the neuron. This means that the cell temporarily hyperpolarizes, or gets even more negative than its resting state. As the potassium channels close, the sodium-potassium pump works to reestablish the resting state.
  

Refractory Periods
Action potentials work on an all-or-none basis. This means that an action potential is either triggered, or it isn’t – like flipping a switch. A neuron will always send the same size action potential. So how do we show that some information is more important or requires our attention right now? The answer lies in how often action potentials are sent – the action potential frequency.
When the brain gets really excited, it fires off a lot of signals. How quickly these signals fire tells us how strong the original stimulus is - the stronger the signal, the higher the frequency of action potentials. There is a maximum frequency at which a single neuron can send action potentials, and this is determined by its refractory periods.
            * Absolute refractory period: during this time it is absolutely impossible to send another action potential. The inactivation (h) gates of the sodium channels lock shut for a time, and make it so no sodium will pass through. No sodium means no depolarization, which means no action potential. Absolute refractory periods help direct the action potential down the axon, because only channels further downstream can open and let in depolarizing ions.
            * Relative refractory period: during this time, it is really hard to send an action potential. This is the period after the absolute refractory period, when the h gates are open again. However, the cell is still hyperpolarized after sending an action potential. It would take even more positive ions than usual to reach the appropriate depolarization potential than usual. This means that the initial triggering event would have to be bigger than normal in order to send more action potentials along. Relative refractory periods can help us figure how intense a stimulus is - cells in your retina will send signals faster in bright light than in dim light, because the trigger is stronger.
Refractory periods also give the neuron some time to replenish the packets of neurotransmitter found at the axon terminal, so that it can keep passing the message along. While it is still possible to completely exhaust the neuron’s supply of neurotransmitter by continuous firing, the refractory periods help the cell last a little longer.
One of the main characteristics that differentiates an action potential from a different kind of electrical signal called graded potentials is that the action potential is the major signal sent down the axon, while graded potentials at the dendrites and cell body vary in size and influence whether an action potential will be sent or not. Graded potentials are small changes in membrane potential that are either excitatory (depolarize the membrane) or inhibitory (hyperpolarize the membrane). Many excitatory graded potentials have to happen at once to depolarize the cell body enough to trigger the action potential.




Graded Potentials
	Action Potentials
	At the dendrites and cell body
	At the axon
	Excitatory or inhibitory
	Always excitatory
	Smaller in size
	Larger voltage difference
	Triggered by input from the outside
	Triggered by membrane depolarization
	Many can happen at once
	Only one at a time
	Can come in different sizes
	All-or-none
	



25. The human reproductive system. Male and female sexual organs and sexual hormones. The biological role of meiosis. 
As animals became more complex, specific organs and organ systems developed to support specific functions for the organism. The reproductive structures that evolved in land animals allow males and females to mate, fertilize internally, and support the growth and development of offspring.
The reproductive tissues of male and female humans develop similarly in utero until a low level of the hormone testosterone is released from male gonads. Testosterone causes the undeveloped tissues to differentiate into male sexual organs. When testosterone is absent, the tissues develop into female sexual tissues. Primitive gonads become testes or ovaries. Tissues that produce a penis in males produce a clitoris in females. The tissue that will become the scrotum in a male becomes the labia in a female; that is, they are homologous structures.
Male Reproductive Anatomy
 Illustration shows a cross section of the penis and testes. The penis widens at the end, into the glans, which is surrounded by the foreskin. The urethra is an opening that runs through the middle of the penis to the bladder. The tissue surrounding the urethra is the Corpus spongiosum, and above the Corpus spongiosum is the Corpus cavernosum. The testes, located immediately behind the penis, are covered by the scrotum. Seminiferous tubules are located in the testes. The epididymis partly surrounds the sac containing the seminiferous tubules. The Vas deferens is a tube connecting the seminiferous tubules to the ejaculatory duct, which begins in the prostate gland. The prostate gland is located behind and below the bladder. The seminal vesicle, located above the prostate, also connects to the seminal vesicle. The bulbourethral gland connects to the ejaculatory duct where the ejaculatory duct enters the penis. 

Figure 1. The reproductive structures of the human male are shown.
In the male reproductive system, the scrotum houses the testicles or testes (singular: testis), including providing passage for blood vessels, nerves, and muscles related to testicular function. The testes are a pair of male reproductive organs that produce sperm and some reproductive hormones. Each testis is approximately 2.5 by 3.8 cm (1.5 by 1 in) in size and divided into wedge-shaped lobules by connective tissue called septa. Coiled in each wedge are seminiferous tubules that produce sperm.
Sperm are immobile at body temperature; therefore, the scrotum and penis are external to the body so that a proper temperature is maintained for motility. In land mammals, the pair of testes must be suspended outside the body at about 2° C lower than body temperature to produce viable sperm. Infertility can occur in land mammals when the testes do not descend through the abdominal cavity during fetal development.
Sperm mature in seminiferous tubules that are coiled inside the testes. The walls of the seminiferous tubules are made up of the developing sperm cells, with the least developed sperm at the periphery of the tubule and the fully developed sperm in the lumen. The sperm cells are mixed with “nursemaid” cells called Sertoli cells which protect the germ cells and promote their development. Other cells mixed in the wall of the tubules are the interstitial cells of Leydig. These cells produce high levels of testosterone once the male reaches adolescence.
When the sperm have developed flagella and are nearly mature, they leave the testicles and enter the epididymis. This structure resembles a comma and lies along the top and posterior portion of the testes; it is the site of sperm maturation. The sperm leave the epididymis and enter the vas deferens (or ductus deferens), which carries the sperm, behind the bladder, and forms the ejaculatory duct with the duct from the seminal vesicles. During a vasectomy, a section of the vas deferens is removed, preventing sperm from being passed out of the body during ejaculation and preventing fertilization.
Semen is a mixture of sperm and spermatic duct secretions (about 10 percent of the total) and fluids from accessory glands that contribute most of the semen’s volume. Sperm are haploid cells, consisting of a flagellum as a tail, a neck that contains the cell’s energy-producing mitochondria, and a head that contains the genetic material. This image shows a micrograph of human sperm as well as a diagram of the parts of the sperm. An acrosome is found at the top of the head of the sperm. This structure contains lysosomal enzymes that can digest the protective coverings that surround the egg to help the sperm penetrate and fertilize the egg. An ejaculate will contain from two to five milliliters of fluid with from 50–120 million sperm per milliliter.
 Micrograph shows human sperm, which have an oval head about 3 microns across and a very long flagellum. Illustration shows that the head is surrounded by the acrosome. The part of the tail closest to the head, called the neck, is thicker than the rest. 

Human sperm, visualized using scanning electron microscopy, have a flagellum, neck, and head. 
The bulk of the semen comes from the accessory glands associated with the male reproductive system. These are the seminal vesicles, the prostate gland, and the bulbourethral gland. The seminal vesicles are a pair of glands that lie along the posterior border of the urinary bladder. The glands make a solution that is thick, yellowish, and alkaline. As sperm are only motile in an alkaline environment, a basic pH is important to reverse the acidity of the vaginal environment. The solution also contains mucus, fructose (a sperm mitochondrial nutrient), a coagulating enzyme, ascorbic acid, and local-acting hormones called prostaglandins. The seminal vesicle glands account for 60 percent of the bulk of semen.
The penis is an organ that drains urine from the renal bladder and functions as a copulatory organ during intercourse. The penis contains three tubes of erectile tissue running through the length of the organ. These consist of a pair of tubes on the dorsal side, called the corpus cavernosum, and a single tube of tissue on the ventral side, called the corpus spongiosum. This tissue will become engorged with blood, becoming erect and hard, in preparation for intercourse. The organ is inserted into the vagina culminating with an ejaculation. During intercourse, the smooth muscle sphincters at the opening to the renal bladder close and prevent urine from entering the penis. An orgasm is a two-stage process: first, glands and accessory organs connected to the testes contract, then semen (containing sperm) is expelled through the urethra during ejaculation. After intercourse, the blood drains from the erectile tissue and the penis becomes flaccid.
The walnut-shaped prostate gland surrounds the urethra, the connection to the urinary bladder. It has a series of short ducts that directly connect to the urethra. The gland is a mixture of smooth muscle and glandular tissue. The muscle provides much of the force needed for ejaculation to occur. The glandular tissue makes a thin, milky fluid that contains citrate (a nutrient), enzymes, and prostate specific antigen (PSA). PSA is a proteolytic enzyme that helps to liquefy the ejaculate several minutes after release from the male. Prostate gland secretions account for about 30 percent of the bulk of semen.
The bulbourethral gland, or Cowper’s gland, releases its secretion prior to the release of the bulk of the semen. It neutralizes any acid residue in the urethra left over from urine. This usually accounts for a couple of drops of fluid in the total ejaculate and may contain a few sperm. Withdrawal of the penis from the vagina before ejaculation to prevent pregnancy may not work if sperm are present in the bulbourethral gland secretions.
Table 1. Male Reproductive Anatomy
	Organ
	Location
	Function
	Scrotum
	External
	Carry and support testes
	Penis
	External
	Deliver urine, copulating organ
	Testes
	Internal
	Produce sperm and male hormones
	Seminal Vesicles
	Internal
	Contribute to semen production
	Prostate Gland
	Internal
	Contribute to semen production
	Bulbourethral Glands
	Internal
	Clean urethra at ejaculation
	Female Reproductive Anatomy
A number of reproductive structures are exterior to the female’s body. These include the breasts and the vulva, which consists of the mons pubis, clitoris, labia majora, labia minora, and the vestibular glands. The vulva is an area associated with the vestibule which includes the structures found in the inguinal (groin) area of women. The mons pubis is a round, fatty area that overlies the pubic symphysis. The clitoris is a structure with erectile tissue that contains a large number of sensory nerves and serves as a source of stimulation during intercourse. The labia majora are a pair of elongated folds of tissue that run posterior from the mons pubis and enclose the other components of the vulva. The labia majora derive from the same tissue that produces the scrotum in a male. The labia minora are thin folds of tissue centrally located within the labia majora. These labia protect the openings to the vagina and urethra. The mons pubis and the anterior portion of the labia majora become covered with hair during adolescence; the labia minora is hairless. The greater vestibular glands are found at the sides of the vaginal opening and provide lubrication during intercourse.
 Side and front views of female reproductive organs are shown. The vagina is wide at the bottom, and narrows into the cervix. Above the cervix is the uterus, which is shaped like a triangle pointing down. Fallopian tubes extend from the top sides of the uterus. The Fallopian tubes curve back in toward the uterus, and end in fingerlike appendages called fimbriae. The ovaries are located between the fimbriae and the uterus. The urethra is located in front of the vagina, and the rectum is located behind. The clitoris is a structure located in front of the urethra. The labia minora and labia majora are folds of tissue on either side of the vagina. 

The reproductive structures of the human female are shown. (credit a: modification of work by Gray’s Anatomy; credit b: modification of work by CDC)
Table 2. Female Reproductive Anatomy
	Organ
	Location
	Function
	Clitoris
	External
	Sensory organ
	Mons pubis
	External
	Fatty area overlying pubic bone
	Labia majora
	External
	Covers labia minora
	Labia minora
	External
	Covers vestibule
	Greater vestibular glands
	External
	Secrete mucus; lubricate vagina
	Breast
	External
	Produce and deliver milk
	Ovaries
	Internal
	Carry and develop eggs
	Oviducts (Fallopian tubes)
	Internal
	Transport egg to uterus
	Uterus
	Internal
	Support developing embryo
	Vagina
	Internal
	Common tube for intercourse, birth canal, passing menstrual flow
	The breasts consist of mammary glands and fat. The size of the breast is determined by the amount of fat deposited behind the gland. Each gland consists of 15 to 25 lobes that have ducts that empty at the nipple and that supply the nursing child with nutrient- and antibody-rich milk to aid development and protect the child.
Internal female reproductive structures include ovaries, oviducts, the uterus, and the vagina. The pair of ovaries is held in place in the abdominal cavity by a system of ligaments. Ovaries consist of a medulla and cortex: the medulla contains nerves and blood vessels to supply the cortex with nutrients and remove waste. The outer layers of cells of the cortex are the functional parts of the ovaries. The cortex is made up of follicular cells that surround eggs that develop during fetal development in utero. During the menstrual period, a batch of follicular cells develops and prepares the eggs for release. At ovulation, one follicle ruptures and one egg is released.
 Illustration A shows a cross section of a human ovary, which is oval with a stem-like structure at one end that anchors it to the uterus. The central part of the ovary is the medulla, and the outer part is the cortex. Follicles exist in the cortex. Small, immature follicles are located near this stem-like structure. As a follicle matures, it grows and moves toward the edge of the ovary opposite the stem, it ruptures, releasing the egg. The follicle is now called a corpus luteum. The corpus luteum matures and moves back toward the stem, along the opposite edge of the ovary from which the follicle matured. The corpus luteum shrinks and eventually disintegrates. The light micrograph shows an oval follicle with a large oocyte located at the center. Around the oocyte are much smaller cells. 

Oocytes develop in (a) follicles, located in the ovary. At the beginning of the menstrual cycle, the follicle matures. At ovulation, the follicle ruptures, releasing the egg. The follicle becomes a corpus luteum, which eventually degenerates. The (b) follicle in this light micrograph has an oocyte at its center. (credit a: modification of work by NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The oviducts, or fallopian tubes, extend from the uterus in the lower abdominal cavity to the ovaries, but they are not in contact with the ovaries. The lateral ends of the oviducts flare out into a trumpet-like structure and have a fringe of finger-like projections called fimbriae. When an egg is released at ovulation, the fimbrae help the non-motile egg enter into the tube and passage to the uterus. The walls of the oviducts are ciliated and are made up mostly of smooth muscle. The cilia beat toward the middle, and the smooth muscle contracts in the same direction, moving the egg toward the uterus. Fertilization usually takes place within the oviducts and the developing embryo is moved toward the uterus for development. It usually takes the egg or embryo a week to travel through the oviduct. Sterilization in women is called a tubal ligation; it is analogous to a vasectomy in males in that the oviducts are severed and sealed.
The uterus is a structure about the size of a woman’s fist. This is lined with an endometrium rich in blood vessels and mucus glands. The uterus supports the developing embryo and fetus during gestation. The thickest portion of the wall of the uterus is made of smooth muscle. Contractions of the smooth muscle in the uterus aid in passing the baby through the vagina during labor. A portion of the lining of the uterus sloughs off during each menstrual period, and then builds up again in preparation for an implantation. Part of the uterus, called the cervix, protrudes into the top of the vagina. The cervix functions as the birth canal.
The vagina is a muscular tube that serves several purposes. It allows menstrual flow to leave the body. It is the receptacle for the penis during intercourse and the vessel for the delivery of offspring. It is lined by stratified squamous epithelial cells to protect the underlying tissue.
Gametogenesis
Gametogenesis, the production of sperm and eggs, takes place through the process of meiosis. During meiosis, two cell divisions separate the paired chromosomes in the nucleus and then separate the chromatids that were made during an earlier stage of the cell’s life cycle. Meiosis produces haploid cells with half of each pair of chromosomes normally found in diploid cells. The production of sperm is called spermatogenesis and the production of eggs is called oogenesis.
Spermatogenesis
Spermatogenesis occurs in the wall of the seminiferous tubules, with stem cells at the periphery of the tube and the spermatozoa at the lumen of the tube. Immediately under the capsule of the tubule are diploid, undifferentiated cells. These stem cells, called spermatogonia (singular: spermatagonium), go through mitosis with one offspring going on to differentiate into a sperm cell and the other giving rise to the next generation of sperm.
  Spermatogenesis begins when the 2n spermatogonium undergoes mitosis, producing more spermatagonia. The spermatogonia undergo meiosis I, producing haploid (1n) secondary spermatocytes, and meiosis II, producing spermatids. Differentiation of the spermatids results in mature sperm. 

During spermatogenesis, four sperm result from each primary spermatocyte.
Meiosis starts with a cell called a primary spermatocyte. At the end of the first meiotic division, a haploid cell is produced called a secondary spermatocyte. This cell is haploid and must go through another meiotic cell division. The cell produced at the end of meiosis is called a spermatid and when it reaches the lumen of the tubule and grows a flagellum, it is called a sperm cell. Four sperm result from each primary spermatocyte that goes through meiosis.
Stem cells are deposited during gestation and are present at birth through the beginning of adolescence, but in an inactive state. During adolescence, gonadotropic hormones from the anterior pituitary cause the activation of these cells and the production of viable sperm. This continues into old age.
Oogenesis
 Oogenesis begins when the 2n oogonium undergoes mitosis, producing a primary oocyte. The primary oocytes arrest in prophase I before birth. After puberty, meiosis of one oocyte per menstrual cycle continues, resulting in a 1n secondary oocyte that arrests in metaphase II and a polar body. Upon ovulation and sperm entry, meiosis is completed and fertilization occurs, resulting in a polar body and a fertilized egg. 

The process of oogenesis occurs in the ovary’s outermost layer.
Oogenesis occurs in the outermost layers of the ovaries. As with sperm production, oogenesis starts with a germ cell, called an oogonium (plural: oogonia), but this cell undergoes mitosis to increase in number, eventually resulting in up to about one to two million cells in the embryo.
The cell starting meiosis is called a primary oocyte. This cell will start the first meiotic division and be arrested in its progress in the first prophase stage. At the time of birth, all future eggs are in the prophase stage. At adolescence, anterior pituitary hormones cause the development of a number of follicles in an ovary. This results in the primary oocyte finishing the first meiotic division. The cell divides unequally, with most of the cellular material and organelles going to one cell, called a secondary oocyte, and only one set of chromosomes and a small amount of cytoplasm going to the other cell. This second cell is called a polar body and usually dies. A secondary meiotic arrest occurs, this time at the metaphase II stage. At ovulation, this secondary oocyte will be released and travel toward the uterus through the oviduct. If the secondary oocyte is fertilized, the cell continues through the meiosis II, producing a second polar body and a fertilized egg containing all 46 chromosomes of a human being, half of them coming from the sperm.
Egg production begins before birth, is arrested during meiosis until puberty, and then individual cells continue through at each menstrual cycle. One egg is produced from each meiotic process, with the extra chromosomes and chromatids going into polar bodies that degenerate and are reabsorbed by the body.




26. Cellular and humoral immune responses. T and B cells, plasma cells. Major histocompatibility complex. Immunoglobulins. Active and passive immunizations. 


Cells of the adaptive immune system
Unlike the innate immune system, the adaptive immune system relies on fewer types of cells to carry out its tasks: B cells and T cells.
Both B cells and T cells are lymphocytes that are derived from specific types of stem cells, called multipotent hematopoietic stem cells, in the bone marrow. After they are made in the bone marrow, they need to mature and become activated. Each type of cell follows different paths to their final, mature forms.
B cells
After formation and maturation in the bone marrow (hence the name “B cell”), the naive B cells move into the lymphatic system to circulate throughout the body. In the lymphatic system, naive B cells encounter an antigen, which starts the maturation process for the B cell. B cells each have one of millions of distinctive surface antigen-specific receptors that are inherent to the organism’s DNA. For example, naive B cells express antibodies on their cell surface, which can also be called membrane-bound antibodies.
  

B cell and membrane-bound antibodies
When a naive B cell encounters an antigen that fits or matches its membrane-bound antibody, it quickly divides in order to become either a memory B cell or an effector B cell, which is also called a plasma cell. Antibodies can bind to antigens directly.
  

Antigen binding to B cell antigen binding site
The antigen must effectively bind with a naive B cell’s membrane-bound antibody in order to set off differentiation, or the process of becoming one of the new forms of a B cell.
  

B cell differentiation process resulting in plasma cell and memory B cell
Memory B cells express the same membrane-bound antibody as the original naive B cell, or the “parent B cell”. Plasma B cells produce the same antibody as the parent B cell, but they aren’t membrane bound. Instead, plasma B cells can secrete antibodies. Secreted antibodies work to identify free pathogens that are circulating throughout the body. When the naive B cell divides and differentiates, both plasma cells and memory B cells are made.
B cells also express a specialized receptor, called the B cell receptor (BCR). B cell receptors assist with antigen binding, as well as internalization and processing of the antigen. B cell receptors also play an important role in signaling pathways. After the antigen is internalized and processed, the B cell can initiate signaling pathways, such as cytokine release, 7 to communicate with other cells of the immune system. For more information on cell signalling, check out this article on cell-to-cell communication.
T cells
Once formed in the bone marrow, T progenitor cells migrate to the thymus (hence the name “T cell”) to mature and become T cells. While in the thymus, the developing T cells start to express T cell receptors (TCRs) and other receptors called CD4 and CD8 receptors. All T cells express T cell receptors, and either CD4 or CD8, not both. So, some T cells will express CD4, and others will express CD8.
Unlike antibodies, which can bind to antigens directly, T cell receptors can only recognize antigens that are bound to certain receptor molecules, called Major Histocompatibility Complex class 1 (MHCI) and class 2 (MHCII). These MHC molecules are membrane-bound surface receptors on antigen-presenting cells, like dendritic cells and macrophages. CD4 and CD8 play a role in T cell recognition and activation by binding to either MHCI or MHCII.
  

Macrophage binding to T cell
T cell receptors have to undergo a process called rearrangement, causing the nearly limitless recombination of a gene that expresses T cell receptors. The process of rearrangement allows for a lot of binding diversity. This diversity could potentially lead to accidental attacks against self cells and molecules because some rearrangement configurations can accidentally mimic a person’s self molecules and proteins. Mature T cells should recognize only foreign antigens combined with self-MHC molecules in order to mount an appropriate immune response.
  

T cell positive selection and negative selection
In order to make sure T cells will perform properly once they have matured and have been released from the thymus, they undergo two selection processes:
            1. Positive selection ensures MHC restriction by testing the ability of MHCI and MHCII to distinguish between self and nonself proteins. In order to pass the positive selection process, cells must be capable of binding only self-MHC molecules. If these cells bind nonself molecules instead of self-MHC molecules, they fail the positive selection process and are eliminated by apoptosis.
            2. Negative selection tests for self tolerance. Negative selection tests the binding capabilities of CD4 and CD8 specifically. The ideal example of self tolerance is when a T cell will only bind to self-MHC molecules presenting a foreign antigen. If a T cell binds, via CD4 or CD8, a self-MHC molecule that isn’t presenting an antigen, or a self-MHC molecule that presenting a self-antigen, it will fail negative selection and be eliminated by apoptosis.
These two selection processes are put into place to protect your own cells and tissues against your own immune response. Without these selection processes, autoimmune diseases would be much more common.
After positive and negative selection, we are left with three types of mature T cells: Helper T cells (TH cells), Cytotoxic T cells (TCcells), and T regulatory cells (T reg cells).
            * Helper T cells express CD4, and help with the activation of TC cells, B cells, and other immune cells.
            * Cytotoxic T cells express CD8, and are responsible for removing pathogens and infected host cells.
            * T regulatory cells express CD4 and another receptor, called CD25. T regulatory cells help distinguish between self and nonself molecules, and by doing so, reduce the risk of autoimmune diseases.
  

Helper T cell, Cytotoxic T cell, T regulatory cell diagrams
Humoral vs. Cell Mediated Immunity
Immunity refers to the ability of your immune system to defend against infection and disease. There are two types of immunity that the adaptive immune system provides, and they are dependent on the functions of B and T cells, as described above.
Humoral immunity is immunity from serum antibodies produced by plasma cells. More specifically, someone who has never been exposed to a specific disease can gain humoral immunity through administration of antibodies from someone who has been exposed, and survived the same disease. “Humoral” refers to the bodily fluids where these free-floating serum antibodies bind to antigens and assist with elimination.
Cell-mediated immunity can be acquired through T cells from someone who is immune to the target disease or infection. “Cell-mediated” refers to the fact that the response is carried out by cytotoxic cells. Much like humoral immunity, someone who has not been exposed to a specific disease can gain cell-mediated immunity through the administration of TH and TC cells from someone that has been exposed, and survived the same disease. The TH cells act to activate other immune cells, while the TC cells assist with the elimination of pathogens and infected host cells.
Immunological memory
Because the adaptive immune system can learn and remember specific pathogens, it can provide long-lasting defense and protection against recurrent infections. When the adaptive immune system is exposed to a new threat, the specifics of the antigen are memorized so we are prevented from getting the disease again. The concept of immune memory is due to the body’s ability to make antibodies against different pathogens.
A good example of immunological memory is shown in vaccinations. A vaccination against a virus can be made using either active, but weakened or attenuated virus, or using specific parts of the virus that are not active. Both attenuated whole virus and virus particles cannot actually cause an active infection. Instead, they mimic the presence of an active virus in order to cause an immune response, even though there are no real threats present. By getting a vaccination, you are exposing your body to the antigen required to produce antibodies specific to that virus, and acquire a memory of the virus, without experiencing illness.
Some breakdowns in the immunological memory system can lead to autoimmune diseases. Molecular mimicry of a self‐antigen by an infectious pathogen, such as bacteria and viruses, may trigger autoimmune disease due to a cross-reactive immune response against the infection. One example of an organism that uses molecular mimicry to hide from immunological defenses is Streptococcus infection.
Innate Immunity vs. Adaptive Immunity: A summary
The following chart compares and summarizes all of the important parts of each immune system:
Attribute
	Innate Immunity
	Adaptive Immunity
	Response Time
	Fast: minutes or hours
	Slow: days
	Specificity
	Only specific for molecules and molecular patterns associated with general pathogens or foreign particles
	Highly specific! Can discriminate between pathogen vs. non-pathogen structures, and miniscule differences in molecular structures
	Major Cell Types
	Macrophages, Neutrophils, Natural Killer Cells, Dendritic Cells, Basophils, Eosinophils
	T cells, B cells, and other antigen presenting cells
	Key Components
	Antimicrobial peptides and proteins, such as toxic granules
	Antibodies
	Self vs. Nonself Discrimination
	Innate immunity is based on self vs. nonself discrimination, so it has to be perfect
	Not as good as the innate immune system, but still pretty good at determining which is which. Problems in self vs. nonself discrimination result in autoimmune diseases
	Immunological Memory
	None
	Memory used can lead to faster response to recurrent or subsequent infections
	Diversity and Customization
	Limited: Receptors used are standard and only recognize antigen patterns. No new receptors are made to adapt the immune response
	Highly diverse: can be customized by genetic recombination to recognize epitopes and antigenic determinants.
	



Immunoglobulins:
Immunoglobulins, also known as antibodies, are glycoprotein molecules produced by plasma cells (white blood cells). They act as a critical part of the immune response by specifically recognizing and binding to particular antigens, such as bacteria or viruses, and aiding in their destruction. The antibody immune response is highly complex and exceedingly specific. The various immunoglobulin classes and subclasses (isotypes) differ in their biological features, structure, target specificity and distribution. Hence, the assessment of the immunoglobulin isotype can provide useful insight into complex humoral immune response. Assessment and knowledge of immunoglobulin structure and classes is also important for selection and preparation of antibodies as tools for immunoassays and other detection applications.


Soluble vs. membrane-bound immunoglobulins
Immunoglobulins occur in two main forms: soluble antibodies and membrane-bound antibodies. (The latter contain a hydrophobic transmembrane region.) Alternative splicing regulates the production of secreted antibodies and surface bound B-cell receptors in B cells.
Membrane-bound immunoglobulins are associated non-covalently with two accessory peptides, forming the B-cell antigen receptor complex. The first antigen receptors expressed by B cells are IgM and IgD. The receptor is a prototype of the antibody that the B cell is prepared to produce. The B cell receptor (BCR) can only bind antigens. It is the heterodimer of Ig alpha and Ig beta that enables the cell to transduce the signal and respond to the presence of antigens on the cell surface. The signal generated causes the growth and proliferation of the B cell and antibody production inside the plasma cell.
Immunoglobulin classes (isotypes)
The various antibodies produced by plasma cells are classified by isotype, each of which differs in function and antigen responses primarily due to structure variability. Five major antibody classes have been identified in placental mammals: IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG and IgM. This classification is based on differences in amino acid sequence in the constant region (Fc) of the antibody heavy chains. IgG and IgA are further grouped into subclasses (e.g., in human IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4, IgA1 and IgA2) based on additional small differences in the amino acid heavy chain sequences.
Based on differences in the amino acid sequence in the constant region of the light chain, immunoglobulins can be further sub-classified by determination of the type of light chain (kappa light chain or lambda light chain). A light chain has two successive domains: one constant domain and one variable domain. The ratio of these two light chains differs greatly among species, but the light chains are always either both kappa or both lambda, never one of each.
Determination of individual subclasses is relevant in assessing primary immunodeficiencies or immune responses, especially if the total IgG or IgA concentration is not altered or elevated.
Isotype class switching
One of the primary functions of B cells in adaptive immunity is that of effecting a humoral response through the secretion of specific antibodies to address invading bodies and their toxic products. Some of these cells can undergo a “class switch” that causes expression of a new antibody isotype. For example, the antibody isotype could switch from an IgM to an antibody of all possible classes (e.g., IgG1,...IgG4, IgE). During this switch, the constant region of the heavy chain is changed, but not the variable region of the heavy chain. This switch does not affect the antibody’s specificity for its antigen, but it does alter the effector functions that each class of antibody can execute. The antibody class switch is critically dependent on the type of cytokine that is present. Various cytokines, such as IL-4, IL-5, IFN-gamma and TGF-beta, are known to be responsible for class switching. At a certain stage, the cell will lose its ability to undergo a switch to a class that has been generated before.
Types of Immunity
When attacked an organism has several means in which it can prepare to defend itself in event of an attack.
            * Active Immunity – Vaccines are used for health purposes to expose our bodies to a particular antigen. These antigens are usually killed or severely weakened to decrease their potency. After destroying these pathogens, the body stores some T cells as memory cells, due to the fact the code for a particular antigen and can be when needed. This memory in T cells can be a means of artificially acquiring immunity while a genuine attack by a pathogen is a naturally acquired type of immunity.
            * Passive Immunity – This is where immunity to particular antigens as a result of genetic traits passed on from parents rendering the offspring immune to a particular pathogenic threat.
27. General design of viruses. Multiplication of bacteriophages and animal viruses. RNA replication and reverse transcription
Viral Morphology
Viruses are acellular, meaning they are biological entities that do not have a cellular structure. Therefore, they lack most of the components of cells, such as organelles, ribosomes, and the plasma membrane. A virion consists of a nucleic acid core, an outer protein coating or capsid, and sometimes an outer envelope made of protein and phospholipid membranes derived from the host cell. The capsid is made up of protein subunits called capsomeres. Viruses may also contain additional proteins, such as enzymes. The most obvious difference between members of viral families is their morphology, which is quite diverse. An interesting feature of viral complexity is that host and virion complexity are uncorrelated. Some of the most intricate virion structures are observed in bacteriophages, viruses that infect the simplest living organisms: bacteria.
Morphology
Viruses come in many shapes and sizes, but these are consistent and distinct for each viral family. In general, the shapes of viruses are classified into four groups: filamentous, isometric (or icosahedral), enveloped, and head and tail. Filamentous viruses are long and cylindrical. Many plant viruses are filamentous, including TMV (tobacco mosaic virus). Isometric viruses have shapes that are roughly spherical, such as poliovirus or herpesviruses. Enveloped viruses have membranes surrounding capsids. Animal viruses, such as HIV, are frequently enveloped. Head and tail viruses infect bacteria. They have a head that is similar to icosahedral viruses and a tail shape like filamentous viruses.
Many viruses use some sort of glycoprotein to attach to their host cells via molecules on the cell called viral receptors. For these viruses, attachment is a requirement for later penetration of the cell membrane, allowing them to complete their replication inside the cell. The receptors that viruses use are molecules that are normally found on cell surfaces and have their own physiological functions. Viruses have simply evolved to make use of these molecules for their own replication.
 image Example of a virus attaching to its host cell: The KSHV virus binds the xCT receptor on the surface of human cells. This attachment allows for later penetration of the cell membrane and replication inside the cell.
Overall, the shape of the virion and the presence or absence of an envelope tell us little about what disease the virus may cause or what species it might infect, but they are still useful means to begin viral classification. Among the most complex virions known, the T4 bacteriophage, which infects the Escherichia coli bacterium, has a tail structure that the virus uses to attach to host cells and a head structure that houses its DNA. Adenovirus, a non-enveloped animal virus that causes respiratory illnesses in humans, uses glycoprotein spikes protruding from its capsomeres to attach to host cells. Non-enveloped viruses also include those that cause polio (poliovirus), plantar warts (papillomavirus), and hepatitis A (hepatitis A virus).
 image Examples of virus shapes: Viruses can be either complex in shape or relatively simple. This figure shows three relatively-complex virions: the bacteriophage T4, with its DNA-containing head group and tail fibers that attach to host cells; adenovirus, which uses spikes from its capsid to bind to host cells; and HIV, which uses glycoproteins embedded in its envelope to bind to host cells.
Enveloped virions like HIV consist of nucleic acid and capsid proteins surrounded by a phospholipid bilayer envelope and its associated proteins. Glycoproteins embedded in the viral envelope are used to attach to host cells. Other envelope proteins include the matrix proteins that stabilize the envelope and often play a role in the assembly of progeny virions. Chicken pox, influenza, and mumps are examples of diseases caused by viruses with envelopes. Because of the fragility of the envelope, non-enveloped viruses are more resistant to changes in temperature, pH, and some disinfectants than are enveloped viruses.
Types of Nucleic Acid
Unlike nearly all living organisms that use DNA as their genetic material, viruses may use either DNA or RNA. The virus core contains the genome or total genetic content of the virus. Viral genomes tend to be small, containing only those genes that encode proteins that the virus cannot obtain from the host cell. This genetic material may be single- or double-stranded. It may also be linear or circular. While most viruses contain a single nucleic acid, others have genomes that have several, called segments.
In DNA viruses, the viral DNA directs the host cell’s replication proteins to synthesize new copies of the viral genome and to transcribe and translate that genome into viral proteins. DNA viruses cause human diseases, such as chickenpox, hepatitis B, and some venereal diseases, like herpes and genital warts.
RNA viruses contain only RNA as their genetic material. To replicate their genomes in the host cell, the RNA viruses encode enzymes that can replicate RNA into DNA, which cannot be done by the host cell. These RNA polymerase enzymes are more likely to make copying errors than DNA polymerases and, therefore, often make mistakes during transcription. For this reason, mutations in RNA viruses occur more frequently than in DNA viruses. This causes them to change and adapt more rapidly to their host. Human diseases caused by RNA viruses include hepatitis C, measles, and rabies.


Baltimore Classification
The most commonly-used system of virus classification was developed by Nobel Prize-winning biologist David Baltimore in the early 1970s. In addition to the differences in morphology and genetics mentioned above, the Baltimore classification scheme groups viruses according to how the mRNA is produced during the replicative cycle of the virus. Viruses can contain double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), single-stranded RNA with a positive polarity (ssRNA), ssRNA with a negative polarity, diploid (two copies) ssRNA, and partial dsDNA genomes. Positive polarity means that the genomic RNA can serve directly as mRNA and a negative polarity means that their sequence is complementary to the mRNA.
 image 



All viruses depend on cells for reproduction and metabolic processes. By themselves, viruses do not encode for all of the enzymes necessary for viral replication. But within a host cell, a virus can commandeer cellular machinery to produce more viral particles. Bacteriophages replicate only in the cytoplasm, since prokaryotic cells do not have a nucleus or organelles. In eukaryotic cells, most DNA viruses can replicate inside the nucleus, with an exception observed in the large DNA viruses, such as the poxviruses, that can replicate in the cytoplasm. RNA viruses that infect animal cells often replicate in the cytoplasm.
The Life Cycle of Viruses with Prokaryote Hosts
The life cycle of bacteriophages has been a good model for understanding how viruses affect the cells they infect, since similar processes have been observed for eukaryotic viruses, which can cause immediate death of the cell or establish a latent or chronic infection. Virulent phages typically lead to the death of the cell through cell lysis. Temperate phages, on the other hand, can become part of a host chromosome and are replicated with the cell genome until such time as they are induced to make newly assembled viruses, or progeny viruses.
The Lytic Cycle
During the lytic cycle of virulent phage, the bacteriophage takes over the cell, reproduces new phages, and destroys the cell. T-even phage is a good example of a well-characterized class of virulent phages. There are five stages in the bacteriophage lytic cycle. Attachment is the first stage in the infection process in which the phage interacts with specific bacterial surface receptors (e.g., lipopolysaccharides and OmpC protein on host surfaces). Most phages have a narrow host range and may infect one species of bacteria or one strain within a species. This unique recognition can be exploited for targeted treatment of bacterial infection by phage therapy or for phage typing to identify unique bacterial subspecies or strains. The second stage of infection is entry or penetration. This occurs through contraction of the tail sheath, which acts like a hypodermic needle to inject the viral genome through the cell wall and membrane. The phage head and remaining components remain outside the bacteria.
 This figure outlines the stages of the lytic cycle. Step 1 is attachment when the phage attaches to the surface of the host. The bacteriophage is shown sitting on the surface of the bacterial host cell. Step 2 is penetration when the viral DNA enters the host cell. The image shows DNA from within the virus being injected into the host DNA. Step 3 is biosynthesis when the phage DNA replicates and the phage proteins are made. The image shows various pieces of virus being built within the cell. Step 4 is maturation when the new phage particles are assembled. This shows the viral components being put together in the cell. The fifth step is lysis when the cell lyses and the newly made phages are released. This shows the cell bursting and built viruses being released. 

A virulent phage shows only the lytic cycle pictured here. In the lytic cycle, the phage replicates and lyses the host cell.
The third stage of infection is biosynthesis of new viral components. After entering the host cell, the virus synthesizes virus-encoded endonucleases to degrade the bacterial chromosome. It then hijacks the host cell to replicate, transcribe, and translate the necessary viral components (capsomeres, sheath, base plates, tail fibers, and viral enzymes) for the assembly of new viruses. Polymerase genes are usually expressed early in the cycle, while capsid and tail proteins are expressed later. During the maturation phase, new virions are created. To liberate free phages, the bacterial cell wall is disrupted by phage proteins such as holin or lysozyme. The final stage is release. Mature viruses burst out of the host cell in a process called lysis and the progeny viruses are liberated into the environment to infect new cells.
The Lysogenic Cycle
In a lysogenic cycle, the phage genome also enters the cell through attachment and penetration. A prime example of a phage with this type of life cycle is the lambda phage. During the lysogenic cycle, instead of killing the host, the phage genome integrates into the bacterial chromosome and becomes part of the host. The integrated phage genome is called a prophage. A bacterial host with a prophage is called a lysogen. The process in which a bacterium is infected by a temperate phage is called lysogeny. It is typical of temperate phages to be latent or inactive within the cell. As the bacterium replicates its chromosome, it also replicates the phage’s DNA and passes it on to new daughter cells during reproduction. The presence of the phage may alter the phenotype of the bacterium, since it can bring in extra genes (e.g., toxin genes that can increase bacterial virulence). This change in the host phenotype is called lysogenic conversion or phage conversion. Some bacteria, such as Vibrio cholerae and Clostridium botulinum, are less virulent in the absence of the prophage. The phages infecting these bacteria carry the toxin genes in their genome and enhance the virulence of the host when the toxin genes are expressed. In the case of V. cholera, phage encoded toxin can cause severe diarrhea; in C. botulinum, the toxin can cause paralysis. During lysogeny, the prophage will persist in the host chromosome until induction, which results in the excision of the viral genome from the host chromosome. After induction has occurred the temperate phage can proceed through a lytic cycle and then undergo lysogeny in a newly infected cell.
Transduction The steps of the lytic and lysogenic cycles. First the phage infects a cell; this shows the virus sitting on the outside of a cell and injecting DNA into the cell. In the next step the phage DNA becomes incorporated into the host genome. In the next step, the cell divides and prophage DNA is passed to the daughter cells. The image shows the cell dividing and the viral DNA within the host genome also being passed to the daughter cell. The next step shows the viral DNA jumping out of the host genome. Under stressful conditions, the prophage DNA is excised from the bacterial chromosomes and enters the lytic cycle. Next, the phage DNA replicates and phage proteins are made. This shows viral pieces being made within the cell. The next step is when the new phage particles are assembled. This shows the virus being build. The final step is when the cell lyses and releases the newly made phages. 
Transduction occurs when a bacteriophage transfers bacterial DNA from one bacterium to another during sequential infections. There are two types of transduction: generalized and specialized transduction. During the lytic cycle of viral replication, the virus hijacks the host cell, degrades the host chromosome, and makes more viral genomes. As it assembles and packages DNA into the phage head, packaging occasionally makes a mistake. Instead of packaging viral DNA, it takes a random piece of host DNA and inserts it into the capsid. Once released, this virion will then inject the former host’s DNA into a newly infected host. The asexual transfer of genetic information can allow for DNA recombination to occur, thus providing the new host with new genes (e.g., an antibiotic-resistance gene, or a sugar-metabolizing gene).
Generalized transduction occurs when a random piece of bacterial chromosomal DNA is transferred by the phage during the lytic cycle. Specialized transduction occurs at the end of the lysogenic cycle, when the prophage is excised and the bacteriophage enters the lytic cycle. Since the phage is integrated into the host genome, the prophage can replicate as part of the host. However, some conditions (e.g., ultraviolet light exposure or chemical exposure) stimulate the prophage to undergo induction, causing the phage to excise from the genome, enter the lytic cycle, and produce new phages to leave host cells. During the process of excision from the host chromosome, a phage may occasionally remove some bacterial DNA near the site of viral integration. The phage and host DNA from one end or both ends of the integration site are packaged within the capsid and are transferred to the new, infected host. Since the DNA transferred by the phage is not randomly packaged but is instead a specific piece of DNA near the site of integration, this mechanism of gene transfer is referred to as specialized transduction. The DNA can then recombine with host chromosome, giving the latter new characteristics. Transduction seems to play an important role in the evolutionary process of bacteria, giving them a mechanism for asexual exchange of genetic information.
 The steps of specialized transduction. Step 1 is viral attachment and penetration. This is when the phage infects a cell. This shows the virus sitting on the outside of a cell and injecting DNA into the cell. Step 2 is integration when the phage DNA becomes incorporated into the host genome. Step 3 is excisionwhen the phage is excised from the bacterial chromosomes along with a short piece of bacterial DNA. The DNA is then packaged into newly formed capsids. When the virus particles are assembled the DNA contains both viral and host segments. Step 4 is infection when the phage contains both viral and bacterial DNA infects a new host cell. Step 5 is recombination when the phage DNA along with the attached bacterial DNA are incorporated into a new cell. The image shows a new bacterial cell with virus DNA as well as other bacterial DNA in its genome. Life Cycle of Viruses with Animal Hosts
Lytic animal viruses follow similar infection stages to bacteriophages: attachment, penetration, biosynthesis, maturation, and release. However, the mechanisms of penetration, nucleic-acid biosynthesis, and release differ between bacterial and animal viruses. After binding to host receptors, animal viruses enter through endocytosis (engulfment by the host cell) or through membrane fusion (viral envelope with the host cell membrane). Many viruses are host specific, meaning they only infect a certain type of host; and most viruses only infect certain types of cells within tissues. This specificity is called a tissue tropism. Examples of this are demonstrated by the poliovirus, which exhibits tropism for the tissues of the brain and spinal cord, or the influenza virus, which has a primary tropism for the respiratory tract.
 Steps of influenza infection. Step 1 is attachment when the influenza virus becomes attached to a target epithelial cell. This image shows a spherical virus binding to the surface of a host cell. Step 2 is penetration when the cell engulfs the virus by endocytosis; this shows the virus within a vacuole. Step 3 is uncoating when the viral contents are released; the image shows the virus being released from the vacuole. Step 4 is biosynthesis when the viral RNA enters the nucleus where it is replicated by RNA polymerase. Step 5 is assembly when the new phage particles are assembled. Step 6 is release when new viral particles are made and released into the extracellular fluid. The cell, which is not killed in the process continues to make new viruses. Animal viruses do not always express their genes using the normal flow of genetic information—from DNA to RNA to protein. Some viruses have a dsDNA genome like cellular organisms and can follow the normal flow. However, others may have ssDNA, dsRNA, or ssRNA genomes. The nature of the genome determines how the genome is replicated and expressed as viral proteins. If a genome is ssDNA, host enzymes will be used to synthesize a second strand that is complementary to the genome strand, thus producing dsDNA. The dsDNA can now be replicated, transcribed, and translated similar to host DNA.
If the viral genome is RNA, a different mechanism must be used. There are three types of RNA genome: dsRNA, positive (+) single-strand (+ssRNA) or negative (−) single-strand RNA (−ssRNA). If a virus has a +ssRNA genome, it can be translated directly to make viral proteins. Viral genomic +ssRNA acts like cellular mRNA. However, if a virus contains a −ssRNA genome, the host ribosomes cannot translate it until the −ssRNA is replicated into +ssRNA by viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP). The RdRP is brought in by the virus and can be used to make +ssRNA from the original −ssRNA genome. The RdRP is also an important enzyme for the replication of dsRNA viruses, because it uses the negative strand of the double-stranded genome as a template to create +ssRNA. The newly synthesized +ssRNA copies can then be translated by cellular ribosomes.
 Viruses with −ssRNA (negative single-stranded RNA) use RdRP (viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase) to make +ssRNA (positive single stranded RNA). RdRP can also be used to covert +ssRNA to −ssRNA. +ssRNA uses host ribosomes to make viral proteins. An alternative mechanism for viral nucleic acid synthesis is observed in the retroviruses, which are +ssRNA viruses. Single-stranded RNA viruses such as HIV carry a special enzyme called reverse transcriptase within the capsid that synthesizes a complementary ssDNA (cDNA) copy using the +ssRNA genome as a template. The ssDNA is then made into dsDNA, which can integrate into the host chromosome and become a permanent part of the host. The integrated viral genome is called a provirus. The virus now can remain in the host for a long time to establish a chronic infection. The provirus stage is similar to the prophage stage in a bacterial infection during the lysogenic cycle. However, unlike prophage, the provirus does not undergo excision after splicing into the genome.
 The HIV viral cycle. Step 1: the HIV fuses to the host-cell surface. Specifically, the gp120 proteins on the surface of the virus binds to the CD4. This then binds to a smaller coreceptor (CCR5 or CXCR4). Step 2: HIV RNA, reverse transtriptase, integrase, and other viral proteins enter the host cell. The virus is brought into the host cell and uncoated; both viral RNA and reverse transcriptase are loosed into the cell. Step 3: Viral DNA is formed by reverse transcription. Step 4: Viral DNA is transported across the nucleus and integrates into the host DNA. Integrase found on the viral DNA. The viral DNA in the host DNA is called provirus. Step 5: New viral RNA is used as genomic RNA and to make viral proteins. New viral RNA strands are made and leave the nucleus. Step 6: New viral RNA and proteins move to the cell surface and a new immature HIV forms. The viral is assembled in an outbulging of the host cell. Step 7: The virus matures when protease releases the proteins that form the mature HIV. Mature virion is released. 





As viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens they cannot replicate without the machinery and metabolism of a host cell. Although the replicative life cycle of viruses differs greatly between species and category of virus, there are six basic stages that are essential for viral replication.
1. Attachment: Viral proteins on the capsid or phospholipid envelope interact with specific receptors on the host cellular surface. This specificity determines the host range (tropism) of a virus.
2. Penetration: The process of attachment to a specific receptor can induce conformational changes in viral capsid proteins, or the lipid envelope, that results in the fusion of viral and cellular membranes. Some DNA viruses can also enter the host cell through receptor-mediated endocytosis.
3. Uncoating: The viral capsid is removed and degraded by viral enzymes or host enzymes releasing the viral genomic nucleic acid.
 Virus replication - figure 1 

4. Replication: After the viral genome has been uncoated, transcription or translation of the viral genome is initiated. It is this stage of viral replication that differs greatly between DNA and RNA viruses and viruses with opposite nucleic acid polarity. This process culminates in the de novo synthesis of viral proteins and genome.
5. Assembly: After de novo synthesis of viral genome and proteins, which can be post-transrciptionally modified, viral proteins are packaged with newly replicated viral genome into new virions that are ready for release from the host cell. This process can also be referred to as maturation.
6. Virion release: There are two methods of viral release: lysis or budding. Lysis results in the death of an infected host cell, these types of viruses are referred to as cytolytic. An example is variola major also known as smallpox. Enveloped viruses, such as influenza A virus, are typically released from the host cell by budding. It is this process that results in the acquisition of the viral phospholipid envelope. These types of virus do not usually kill the infected cell and are termed cytopathic viruses.
After virion release some viral proteins remain within the host’s cell membrane, which acts as potential targets for circulating antibodies. Residual viral proteins that remain within the cytoplasm of the host cell can be processed and presented at the cell surface on MHC class-I molecules, where they are recognised by T cells.


Reverse Transcription
Reverse transcription involves a broad family of enzymes called reverse transcriptases that play a unique role in the flow of genetic information. Since their discovery, researchers have used these enzymes as fundamental tools in a wide range of molecular biology applications.
The original central dogma of molecular biology held that DNA was transcribed to RNA, which in turn was translated into protein. However, this concept was challenged in the 1970s when two scientific teams, one led by Howard Temin at the University of Wisconsin and the other led by David Baltimore at MIT, independently identified new enzymes associated with replication of RNA viruses called retroviruses. These enzymes convert the viral RNA genome into a complementary DNA (cDNA) molecule, which then is capable of integrating into the host’s genome. These are RNA-dependent DNA polymerases and are called reverse transcriptase because, in contrast to the DNA-to-RNA flow of the central dogma, they transcribe RNA templates into cDNA molecules.
  

Reverse transcriptases have been identified in many organisms, including viruses, bacteria, animals, and plants. In these organisms, the general role of reverse transcriptase is to convert RNA sequences to cDNA sequences that are capable of inserting into different areas of the genome. In this manner, reverse transcription contributes to:
            * Propagation of retroviruses—e.g., human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Moloney murine leukemia virus (M-MuLV), and avian myeloblastosis virus (AMV) 
            * Genetic diversity in eukaryotes via mobile transposable elements called retrotransposons 
            * Replication of chromosomal ends called telomeres 
            * Synthesis of extrachromosomal DNA/RNA chimeric elements called multicopy single-stranded DNA (msDNA) in bacteria 
  

Applications
While reverse transcriptases have functional roles in biological systems, they also serve as important tools for studying RNA populations. One of the first molecular biology protocols utilizing reverse transcriptases was for the production of cDNA to build libraries that contained DNA copies of mRNA from cells and tissues. These cDNA libraries aid in understanding actively expressed genes and their functions at a specific time point.
Although the creation of cDNA libraries was an important step forward in characterizing expressed genes, challenges remained for the study of low-abundance RNAs. These were subsequently addressed with the development of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a technique to amplify small amounts of genetic material. Reverse transcription combined with PCR, or reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR), allows detection of RNA even at very low levels of gene expression and paves the way for detection of circulating RNA, RNA viruses, and cancerous gene fusions in molecular diagnostics. 


N.B (Questions which have been asked to students previously)


In general the main energy source for cellular metabolism is glucose which is catabolized in three subsequent process:
Glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid cycle (Krebs cycle), oxidative phosphorylation


Draw heart:
draw it and give a total definition of a structure of heart 
The human heart is a four-chambered muscular organ, shaped and sized roughly like a man's closed fist with two-thirds of the mass to the left of midline. The heart is enclosed in a pericardial sac that is lined with the parietal layers of a serous membrane.






Heart circulation:
The circulatory system is made up of blood vessels that carry blood away from and towards the heart. Arteries carry blood away from the heart and veins carry blood back to the heart. The circulatory system carries oxygen, nutrients, and hormones to cells, and removes waste products, like carbon dioxide






Contraction of heart :
The cardiac cycle refers to the alternating contraction and relaxation of the myocardium in the walls of the heart chambers, coordinated by the conduction system, during one heartbeat. Systole is the contraction phase of the cardiac cycle, and diastole is the relaxation phase.




What contracts the heart:
the upper heart chambers (atria) contracts
And then the AV node sends impulse to the ventricles 
The lower heart chamber contracts
And then the SA node sends signal to the atrial to contract then it starts again




What causes systole:
They occurred as the heart beats pumping blood through a system of blood vessels that carry blood to every part of the body. Systole occurs when the heart contracts to pump blood out and diastole occurs when the heart relaxes after contraction